https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/07/dining/the-sancerre-moment.html
‘Listening’ to Sancerre Tell Its Story - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2245
AdvertisementSupported byWine SchoolBy Eric AsimovUpdated | June 2, 2014 Wine School, a monthly column, invites you to drink wine with Eric Asimov. In each installment, Mr. Asimov chooses a type of wine for you to try at home. After a month, Mr. Asimov posts his reaction to the wine and addresses readers’ thoughts and questions. April’s assignment was Beaujolais. May’s assignment was Sancerre; Mr. Asimov shares his thoughts on this wine below. Almost everybody has heard of sauvignon blanc. It’s one of the most common international grapes, grown in quantity in just about every country that makes wine.This familiarity can lead to casual assumptions, the bane of wine drinkers (and reporters) everywhere. If we know sauvignon blanc, it’s easy to assume we know Sancerre, which is made from the sauvignon blanc grape. Yet a grape is only part of the story, and this is especially true of Sancerre, a wine that at its best speaks more of its place of origin than of its particular grape.Welcome back to Wine School, where every month we convene to examine a particular wine together. The idea is to penetrate beyond the expectations and assumptions that so often shape our responses to a wine and can impede a sense of ease and confidence. Instead of simply tasting the wine, we drink it attentively in its natural setting, with food at the table. We gauge our reactions not only to how the wine smells and tastes, but also to how it goes with food, to its texture in the mouth and to how it makes us feel.Emotions play a crucial role in Wine School. Too often, the emotional response to wine is ignored in favor of a hyper-rational approach: the grapes, the soil, the winemaking techniques and materials, aromas, flavors, alcoholic content and so on. These things are important, but wine (like all foods) affects us emotionally, and that is important, too, especially when it comes to the stories wines can tell.This notion of wine telling the story of a place, the French sense of terroir, contributes instrumentally to the heightened pleasure that so many people experience in drinking wine. The ability of wine to articulate terroir is often the difference between an ordinary beverage, like almost all soft drinks, and an expression of culture, which the best wines convey. It is the dividing line between simple wines, no matter how enjoyable, and the finest wines.I drank a wine from California the other day that was absolutely delicious and retails for about $22 a liter. I would buy it again in a heartbeat. But was it an expression of terroir? Not at all. The wine had a proprietary name, Tendu, and it carries the California appellation, meaning the wine does not communicate the character of any particular part of the state. It was simply an honest, unpretentious delight, and often that can be pleasure enough.But the special magic of wine is that it can be so distinctive that it could have come from nowhere else. Such is the case with a good Sancerre, a sauvignon blanc that could come only from the hills and valleys around the commune of Sancerre, about 75 miles southeast of Orléans in the Loire Valley in central France.This is not to say that all Sancerre wines have this quality. Plenty of mundane commercial Sancerre is produced, wines that could just as easily have come from Argentina or South Africa as from the Loire Valley. But the three Sancerre wines recommended for this class, from Lucien Crochet, Gérard Boulay and Franck & Jean-François Bailly (also known as Bailly-Reverdy), were all wines of terroir and impeccable expressions of Sancerre.Many of you noted the distinctiveness. “Sancerre is not like any other sauvignon blanc I’ve had from other regions,” wrote Max of Ann Arbor, Mich., who did not drink one of the recommended wines but found a Sancerre from another excellent producer, Gérard & Pierre Morin. “Is it the soil? The age of the vines? The winemaker’s skills?”It’s often assumed (assumptions again!) that terroir refers solely to the soil. Soil is a significant part of the equation, but terroir stands for so much more than dirt. The term, for which no English counterpart exists, embraces the microclimate of the vineyard and its elevation, its exposition to the sun and, often overlooked, the people who tend the grapes and make the wine.In the Old World, this human facet of terroir is often communal. In Burgundy, the region in which the notion of terroir was long ago elevated to the most exacting heights, it is a matter of faith that the people of, say, Volnay, have a different philosophy and approach toward making wine than the people from the neighboring commune of Pommard.The intricacies of Sancerre terroir have no doubt been parsed just as finely by the Sancerrois, but they have yet to be codified like Burgundy and may never be, as politics nowadays practically prohibits stratifying wine regions in ways that may affect people economically. So we’ll take a more general approach and ask what makes these wines Sancerre rather than sauvignon blanc?Good Sancerre is often more subtle and complex than other sauvignon blancs. It can have a distinct pungency, redolent of hay and grapefruit, but good Sancerre also often has a chalky minerality, that catchall term that expresses figuratively the cluster of stony, rocky, earthy aromas and flavors so prized by wine lovers.Where does this mineral sensation come from? The soil is crucial in developing these flavors, though scientists have yet to agree on exactly how this works. As Jacqueline Friedrich points out in “Earthly Delights From the Garden of France,” the soils of Sancerre are part of the same geological formation that makes up much of the Chablis and Champagne regions. I find it fascinating that good Sancerre and good Chablis can have more in common than Sancerre and sauvignon blancs from California or New Zealand.The three recommended wines were excellent examples of Sancerre, all with the underlying elements of citrus, hay and mineral flavors but different nonetheless. The 2012 La Croix du Roy from Lucien Crochet was the fullest bodied, yet graceful and zesty, with a lip-smacking, refreshing quality. The 2012 Bailly was more pungent, with a fruit flavor that reminded me of candied grapefruit peel, yet lighter-bodied and tangy. The 2012 Gérard Boulay à Chavignol was my favorite. It had a depth and texture that seemed to resound in the mouth long after I swallowed and a great, snappy minerality.Most of you liked the wines very much. I was thrilled that many of you were not drinking just one bottle, but were actively seeking out Sancerres for comparison, and even trying sauvignon blancs from other regions in tandem with the Sancerre.It would be presumptuous of me to recommend this for everybody. The wines are not cheap, and I don’t dismiss the investment many of you are making by seeking out one wine. But really, there is no better way to assess one bottle than in comparison with another, so if you can do it, bravo!Almost everybody noted how these wines change when consumed with food, and many of you enjoyed Sancerre with goat cheese in one variation or another. That’s a tried and true regional pairing. I don’t believe that the wines of a region automatically go with the local cheeses (don’t make the mistake of serving Époisses with delicate red Burgundy, for example) but this match for me is a joyous expression of Sancerrois culture.I was surprised by how many of you found the wines to be not particularly aromatic. I suspect that many people are making these initial observations on bottles pulled directly from the refrigerator. This may sound a little un-American, but drinking good white wine too cold is like listening to music through ear muffs. The cold mutes the aromas and flavors, numbing the wine to a dull neutrality. You want to do this with bad wine; the flaws will be hidden. But good wine? It will benefit greatly if you take it out of the fridge a half-hour before you plan to drink it. Trust me, you will enjoy the wine much more lightly cool.The three wines I recommended offered a general view of the region, but each of these producers makes smaller cuvées of wines that exhibit the more local qualities of specific terroirs, like Boulay’s Monts Damnés bottling or Le Chêne from Crochet. Some Sancerres, as a reader who identified himself as “Ludovic of New York” pointed out, come from grapes planted on flinty silex soils in the eastern part of the appellation and tell a different story. Les Romains from Domaine Vacheron is an excellent example of a Sancerre from silex.One last thing: one reader emailed me to express astonishment at being given a red wine at a shop when she asked for Sancerre. “Isn’t Sancerre a white wine?” she asked.Not always. Many Sancerre producers make some rouge, too, from the pinot noir grape. These wines often used to be thin and acidic, but they have gotten much better over the years. Today, they are often charming and delicious.Your next assignment: Riesling.Previously in Wine School...In May, readers were assigned to investigate Sancerre. You can join the conversation about this wine by finding the wines and answering the questions that Eric Asimov poses below. We’ll switch to a white wine, Sancerre, which (once, at least) was sort of an analog to Beaujolais. Both were thought of as simple wines. Indeed, decades ago, Sancerre was often the white you found in Parisian cafes, just as Beaujolais was routinely the red.But the wines have gone in opposite directions. While the public opinion of Beaujolais may be low, it’s beloved by the wine intelligentsia and sommeliers. By contrast, the public has embraced Sancerre, but the intelligentsia and sommeliers often sneer at it. What’s more, gamay, the grape of Beaujolais, is grown in few other places around the world beyond Switzerland and isolated pockets of the Loire Valley and the West Coast. But sauvignon blanc, the grape of Sancerre, has become a certified global phenomenon, produced in quantity all over the world.Rather than look at sauvignon blanc, the grape, we will focus on Sancerre, the wine, two entirely different things. While sauvignon blanc can be made into wine anywhere, only in Sancerre does it achieve a certain set of aromas and flavors that set it apart from other sauvignon blanc wines. It is this ability to express distinctiveness, to transmit a sense of place through the medium of wine, that has led to the notion of terroir, the holy grail of so many wine producers.Here are three Sancerres that I suggest you try to find:Lucien Crochet Sancerre La Croix du Roy 2012 (Rosenthal Wine Merchant, New York), $28.Franck & Jean-François Bailly (also known as Bailly-Reverdy) Sancerre 2012 (a Daniel Johnnes Selection/Michael Skurnik Wines, Syosset, N.Y.), $24.Gérard Boulay Sancerre à Chavignol 2012 (a Thomas Calder Selection/Polaner Selections, Mount Kisco, N.Y.), $28.These producers make multiple cuvées, so be careful which ones you buy. And if you can’t find any of these wines, other Sancerre producers I recommend include Domaine Vacheron, Pascal Jolivet, Thomas-Labaille, Yves Martin, Hippolyte Reverdy and Michel Thomas. If you are ambitious, why not also get a bottle of sauvignon blanc from New Zealand, California, South America or South Africa and compare the wines?Remember: Wine School is about drinking, not tasting, and I recommend drinking the wine with a meal. Sancerre is a classic match for goat cheese. It goes beautifully with many salads, omelets, shellfish and fish dishes. A British writer, Fiona Beckett, highly recommends cucumber fritters, which I look forward to trying.Sancerre should be served chilled, but not too cold, which puts a damper on aromas and flavors. If you have a bottle in the fridge, take it out for a half-hour before drinking. And while you are drinking, consider these questions:What does this wine feel like in the mouth? Very different from Bordeaux and Beaujolais, I would guess.Sauvignon blanc can be a polarizing grape; some people absolutely hate it. What does it smell and taste like to you? Do you even like it? Be frank.Does Sancerre remind you of other sauvignon blanc wines? Or some other type of wine entirely? If so, which ones? (This is an advanced question, demanding intimate knowledge of a few other regions. Don’t worry if no answer occurs to you.)Please consider posting your thoughts and observations at nytimes.com/dining.EMAIL: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.Tasting Report From the ReadersA selection of reader comments about Eric Asimov’s three suggested bottles of Sancerre.• Lucien Crochet Sancerre La Croix du Roy 2012 (Rosenthal Wine Merchant, New York), $28.“It was delicious and paralleled what I detected by smell: delicate, fresh, citrusy and balanced by mineral notes. We had it with sushi and it was a lovely dinner companion. Slightly warmer temperature brought out nuances and balance to flavors.” — Ali, New York“To me, the texture felt like a bunch of tasty white grapes instantly melting in my mouth. It was almost like a sweet-sour combination. The wine’s aroma and the taste had a somewhat powerful citrusy feel to it, smooth to the taste buds, with a quick, strong sensation, but not lingering. This wine definitely had a stronger citrus-like aroma and taste to it, as compared to other sauvignon blancs I have tasted. The wine was paired with some fresh goat cheese and some bay scallops, along with a small salad. It went well.” — fjm, Wayne, Penn.• Franck & Jean-François Bailly (also known as Bailly-Reverdy) Sancerre 2012 (a Daniel Johnnes Selection/Michael Skurnik Wines, Syosset, N.Y.), $24.“First we drank the Franck & Jean-François Bailly. It felt light in my mouth. I wasn’t particularly excited about smelling it; it smelled like white wine. The flavor was sweeter than I would normally pick but it was very refreshing. We had it with a vegetarian chili and salad. My husband thought it nicely offset the spice of the chili. The taste became more complex throughout dinner (Wine School must be working: two months ago I would not have noticed). The one wine I have had that it reminded me of was Boutari Mantinia Moschofilero. I liked it very much.” — Ferguson, Princeton“The wine was earthy, mineral and acidic as in a tart apple, with a pleasant, lasting tingling sensation in the mouth and a long finish. It had “zing” and paired well with spiced sautéed shrimp and spinach salad.” — Ali, New York• Gérard Boulay Sancerre à Chavignol 2012 (a Thomas Calder Selection/Polaner Selections, Mount Kisco, N.Y.), $28.“We found the Gérard Boulay and drank it with a dinner of steamed lobster. The aroma was difficult to distinguish at first but after a few sniffs we thought it smelled clean and a little like grapefruit. We drink sauvignon blanc now and then, especially on warm spring or summer days. This was a nice one. It had a refreshing texture; again the word “clean” comes to mind here. It felt light and crisp in the mouth. It did not seem to linger like the Bordeaux.”  — Suzanne Schry, New York“Chavignol had good fragrance — effervescent and crisp in the mouth, smooth going down. Smoothness of the Chavignol was consistent and did not change with the goat cheese hors d’oeuvre. However it did taste “brighter” after the cheese. Overall we (particularly the two ladies) preferred Chavignol.” — Tom, New YorkAdvertisement