https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/03/us/youtube-shooting.html
YouTube Shooting: Woman Wounds 3 Before Killing Herself, Police Say - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1288
AdvertisementSupported byBy Maggie Astor and Maya Salam• Three people were injured by gunfire, one of them critically, in a shooting at YouTube’s headquarters in San Bruno, Calif., on Tuesday afternoon.• The San Bruno Police Department identified the attacker, who died of an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound, as Nasim Najafi Aghdam, who was in her late 30s.• President Trump has been briefed and tweeted “thoughts and prayers” to the victims.Here is the latest information on the attack.Chief Ed Barberini of the San Bruno Police Department said at a news conference that three victims had been transported away with gunshot wounds. He had previously indicated that there were four shooting victims; the discrepancy stemmed from the fact that at least one person was injured while fleeing the building but not shot.The gunshot victims were taken to Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital, the only Level 1 trauma center in San Francisco. Brent Andrew, a spokesman for the hospital, said at a news conference that a 36-year-old man was in critical condition, a 32-year-old woman in serious condition and a 27-year-old woman in fair condition.(READ MORE: Law enforcement officials were still investigating the attack at the YouTube headquarters Tuesday.)Sundar Pichai, the chief executive of Google, which owns YouTube, said in a statement late Tuesday afternoon that Google was “doing everything we can to support them and their families at this time.”The police found a woman, believed to be the attacker and later identified as Ms. Aghdam, dead in the building from a self-inflicted gunshot wound. Social media postings associated with her included a video in which she criticized YouTube.Chief Barberini said that the suspect had used a handgun, and that there was no evidence of a second attacker.Ms. Aghdam’s gender is noteworthy because mass shootings are almost always perpetrated by men. An F.B.I. study released in 2014 found that, from 2000 to 2013, women were responsible for only six of 160 mass shootings in the United States.When the police arrived, two minutes after receiving 911 calls, they had to wade through YouTube employees fleeing the building.Many employees interviewed outside said they had initially thought the episode was a fire drill. Others said they ran when people started shouting that there was a shooter.Zach Vorhies, 37, a senior software engineer at YouTube, said in an interview that he had been sitting at his desk when the fire alarm went off, and that he grabbed his electric skateboard and headed for the back exit. As he rode down a gravel hill, he said, he heard someone shouting and saw a man lying motionless in one of the office’s outdoor dining areas.“He had a red spot on his stomach, and he was lying on his back, not moving,” Mr. Vorhies said. “I saw the blood soak through the shirt.”About 25 feet away from the victim, he said, a heavyset man wearing gray was shouting, “Come at me!” Mr. Vorhies thought the man was the attacker, but he did not see a gun, and said it was possible the man had actually “been taunting the shooter.”The dining area can be reached from an adjacent parking structure without an employee badge, Mr. Vorhies said.In a nearby parking lot to which 200 or so employees had evacuated, armed police officers waded into the crowd. The police asked for employees who had witnessed something firsthand to come forward, and about two dozen people, some visibly distraught, walked over to the officers.Vadim Lavrusik, a YouTube employee who formerly worked for The New York Times, tweeted just before 1 p.m. that there was an “active shooter at YouTube HQ” and that he had “heard shots and saw people running while at my desk.” He said that he was barricaded in a room with co-workers, but moments later tweeted that he had been safely evacuated.By 2:15 p.m., President Trump had been briefed on the shooting, and Cameron Rogers Polan, a spokeswoman for the San Francisco Division of the F.B.I., said in an email that the agency was in contact with the San Bruno police. The San Francisco division of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives tweeted that it, too, was responding to the attack.Rattled by a mass shooting in their midst, several Silicon Valley giants tweeted their concern — and acknowledged the role their own platforms had played in spreading false information during this and other violence.“We’re also aware of the misinformation being spread on Twitter,” Jack Dorsey, the chief executive of Twitter, tweeted. “We’re tracking, learning, and taking action.”Nellie Bowles, Jack Nicas, Matt Stevens, Liam Stack, Daniel Victor and Dai Wakabayashi contributed reporting.Advertisement