https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/26/travel/the-pros-and-cons-of-budget-bus-travel-megabus-peter-pan.html
The Pros and (Considerable) Cons of Budget Bus Travel - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1526
AdvertisementSupported byFrugal TravelerBy Seth KugelTickets for the discount bus company Megabus start at $1, plus some pesky fees. Its routes connect dozens of United States cities from Maine to California (along with more in Canada). Many routes run overnight, meaning you can save on lodging, if you’re up for brushing your teeth at highway rest stops.So, is Megabus the cheapest way to see America? Couldn’t you ramble through more than half the country for a month, hitting, say, 10 cities for less than $25?After a weeklong, six-leg trial (five of the legs with Megabus), my conclusion is: sort of. You’ll rarely get that $1 fare; capturing those prizes, which are released irregularly, requires constant social-media monitoring. The seats, pleasant enough for a four-hour trip from New York to Washington, are extremely difficult places to sleep. Most inconveniently, the routes often don’t connect in the way you want them to, forcing often absurdly lengthy connections.To be fair, Megabus was not set up for meandering road trips anymore than the Staten Island Ferry was meant as the no-frills pleasure cruise it has become for many. Its main task is to get people from Point A to Point B, cheaply and with no extras (except for semifunctioning Wi-Fi).But with a few adjustments and concessions, it can work. Most important, use the long layovers to your advantage.My plan was to go from New York to Silver Spring, Md. (via Peter Pan, not Megabus, which does not stop in Silver Spring), and crash my nephews’ swim practice with a takeout Vietnamese dinner. A few hours later, I’d catch the Metro to Union Station in Washington for Megabus’s overnight bus to Knoxville, Tenn., known for its music, spending a day and evening there. Then I’d catch a 1:30 a.m. bus to Lexington, Ky., arriving at 5 a.m., to start a four-day bike trip. The way back worked out with shorter stops and just one overnight.Sound torturous? Perhaps. I’m not saying it was paradise on wheels. But the total cost, including the Peter Pan leg, was just $63 (and could have been less if I hadn’t had to postpone the trip once and reschedule on short notice). By comparison, round-trip flights from New York to Lexington when I booked were edging toward $400.The first leg to Silver Spring was a breeze; at $18 it was the most expensive leg, but worth it — dropping me off, by the way, about two minutes from the tasty and affordable Lotus Cafe. Later that evening, after pho and spring rolls and some horsing around in the pool, I hopped on the Metro to Union Station for the bus to Knoxville.No one is expecting an overnight bus ride to be pleasant, but in the last five years of writing Frugal Traveler, I have often been surprised by almost decadently luxurious overnight buses, with plush seats that recline fairly close to horizontal.But those were in countries like Brazil, Mexico and Indonesia. In the United States, the same cost-cutting mania that removed the last traces of dignity from coach-class air travel has shorn any semblance of comfort from our buses, as well. (Without such cost cutting, I admit that I wouldn’t be writing this article in the first place.)So I should not have been surprised that my upper-deck seat to Knoxville was barely cushioned and quite tight. Still, the bus was clean, the driver upbeat and friendly considering the task before her, and the bathroom functional. But an unpleasant surprise was in store for anyone who came unprepared. By which I mean me.As we boarded, most passengers broke out pillows and heavy blankets and comforters, as if we were going on an Arctic expedition. I scoffed at their packing inefficiency. My sleeping pill occupied about one one-millionth the space.Then came an odd announcement. “This bus is climate-controlled,” said the driver, suddenly sounding less hospitable, “which means we cannot control the AC or the heat. Send your comments to megabus.com.”It was a pre-emptive strike against passenger mutiny, as the bus was soon frigid. My carry-on backpack offered little help; I had packed for a bike ride in the scorching heat. Bike shorts pulled snug over your head like a ski mask, it turns out, do not conserve much warmth. (A Megabus spokesman confirmed that the bus driver does not control the temperature and said that the buses are set to the same temperature as “most federal buildings.”) I did get one welcome break from a sleepless, shivering night — a 3:45 a.m. stop at Love’s Travel Stop, somewhere in western Virginia.If you’ve been to Love’s, you know what awaited me: every possibly temptation for anyone with a sweet tooth or a penchant for late-night grease. (Count me in for both.) A woman from the bus spotted me eyeing the two-for-$3 Tornados, greasy meats and cheeses rolled up in crispy crusts (or in blueberry pancakes!), rotating on rollers like 7-Eleven hot dogs under a heat lamp. Embarrassed I had been spotted considering such a purchase, I slipped away.A few minutes later, after admiring the CB radios and pocketknives and an impressive jerky selection, I went back and grabbed the plastic tongs, sliding one pizza Tornado and one blueberry-pancake-and-sausage Tornado into the provided sleeves.Three dollars for guaranteed highway malaise — who can turn that down? “I knew you was going to get them,” the woman who had been eyeing me said triumphantly. Predictably, they were a greasy mess, the sort of thing that would qualify as tasty if it weren’t so obviously trying to kill you.I do pretty well on minimal sleep, and spent a great day in Knoxville. The 1:30 a.m. bus from Knoxville to Lexington, though, tested even me. The route had started in Atlanta and was nearly full when I (and a drunk 20-something blond guy with dreads, stinking of cigarettes) boarded. I got about half a seat next to a friendly but corpulent woman with pink hair, which is more than I can say for that drunk guy — no one would make space for him, and he spent the trip passed out in the stairwell.We arrived in Lexington, and after taking a (probably illegal) nap behind some very pleasant shrubs on the manicured University of Kentucky campus, I went to breakfast. (Cinnamon rolls from Sunrise Bakery, highly recommended.)The trip back looked to be smoother, with just one overnight, and warmer clothes. But pulling out of Lexington for the first leg, the bus kept jolting, causing lots of rattling on the upper deck. “This is scary,” a small girl said. The bus driver persevered — more than I can say for the bus, which conked out on I-75, near Conway. We were stuck on the side of the highway for over three stuffy hours. But we got a refund for that leg, I made my connection in Knoxville, and by early afternoon the next day I was back in New York.My conclusion: Megabus as a cheap way of getting from Point A to Point B is great, if you are doing a short route or are strapped for cash. Megabus road trips as leisure travel? That’s an off-label use prescribed for a specific type of person: the truly flexible, comfort-be-damned, all-out budget traveler. Who has room in his bag for a blanket and pillow. And a stomach capable of digesting a 3 a.m. blueberry-pancake Tornado.Advertisement