https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/22/dining/sausage-bake-recipe.html
Succulent Sausages, Golden Vegetables and a Single Pan - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
652
AdvertisementSupported byA Good AppetiteThis unfussy sausage bake, rounded out with Parmesan potatoes and red cabbage, takes cues from Britain.By Melissa ClarkWe Americans don’t cook nearly enough sausage bakes. In Britain, those glorious one-pan meals of vegetables topped with browned sausages are standard weeknight fare — easy to throw together, endlessly variable and as cozy and warming as supper should be.Here, in the United States, we are more likely to roast a chicken over those same vegetables, but that takes twice as long. As for sausages, frying or broiling is our go-to, but while they get the job done quickly, they won’t give you a full dinner.This recipe embraces the British model, baking vegetables and sausages together for a simple yet satisfying winter meal.I start with halved potatoes and wedges of red cabbage seasoned with sturdy branches of rosemary and thyme and lightly crushed caraway and coriander seeds. Next, there’s a blanket of thinly sliced onions to soften, brown and practically melt into the vegetables beneath it, followed by a generous coating of grated Parmesan for complexity and richness. Last, there’s the crowning layer of sausages, which turn crisp and coppery on top but stay juicy and tender underneath.Although it’s not widely done in Britain, I halve the sausages lengthwise and brush them with mustard before nestling them into the potatoes and cabbage. The cut surface allows the pork juices and fat to render out freely, seasoning all the vegetables underneath like an instant sauce.My usual instinct for preparing this kind of dinner is to pull out a rimmed sheet pan, but in this case, a 9-by-13-inch baking pan or a small roasting pan is a wiser choice. A smaller pan brings all the ingredients closer, so the sausage juices can better mingle with the ingredients. The increased depth is also an asset, allowing for some steaming, which helps cook the sturdy potatoes and cabbage. If you have a metal pan, you’ll get the maximum amount of browning on the potatoes. But I’ve also made this in a ceramic dish, and there were still golden spots.You can make this with any kind of meaty sausages: spicy turkey or lamb, chicken or duck, classic pork bratwurst, chorizo or hot Italian links. For a dish as unfussy as a sausage bake, using what you’ve got is part of the appeal.Recipe: Sausages With Potatoes and Red CabbageFollow NYT Food on Twitter and NYT Cooking on Instagram, Facebook and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.Melissa Clark has been a columnist for the Food section since 2007. She reports on food trends, creates recipes and appears in cooking videos linked to her column, A Good Appetite. She has also written dozens of cookbooks.  @MelissaClark • Facebook Advertisement