http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/05/dining/paul-liebrandt-exacting-chef-set-to-open-the-elm-in-williamsburg.html
Paul Liebrandt, Exacting Chef, Set to Open the Elm in Williamsburg - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2052
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeff GordinierHunched at a table at Bar Masa, four stories above Columbus Circle, Paul Liebrandt was nibbling and sipping his way toward an $800 bill and talking about art. “An artist like Cy Twombly —  it’s just a bunch of scribbles to some people,” the chef said. “I look at it, I see rhythm in what he’s doing. How does he know to do it like that? I don’t know. He just does it. There’s no plan.” Mr. Liebrandt is only 36, but the British chef has occupied an influential, and at times perplexing, seat in New York’s fine-dining pantheon for more than a decade. On this rare night off, he was citing Twombly’s curves and colors as a stab at self-explanation: When Mr. Liebrandt creates a new dish at Corton, his culinary atelier in TriBeCa, he’s responding to the same kind of instinctual tug. “I see a connection in something, without necessarily seeing it,” he said. “It’s a feeling. And we have to explore that feeling, and sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn’t.” Plenty of award-winning cooks around the world are treated these days with the sort of gasping awe that used to greet pioneering painters and composers. New York certainly has its share of creative powerhouses (think Daniel Boulud, Eric Ripert, David Chang). But many of them strive to convey a certain down-to-earth, New Yorky nonchalance; a few might even brush off the word “artist.”Not Mr. Liebrandt. He embraces it.Prone to perfectionism in the kitchen but allergic to schmoozing in the world outside, easy to respect but difficult to warm up to, Mr. Liebrandt seems to exist, like many artists, in a bubble of his own devising. In spite of his relative youth, he doesn’t have that much stylistically in common with his comrades in, say, the booming restaurant scene across the East River. "When you look at me,” he said, “I couldn’t be more far from being Brooklyn." So it will be interesting to see what happens this July when he breaks out of that bubble to open the Elm, a more casual enterprise in the King & Grove Williamsburg hotel. Will hipsterville take to this exacting auteur?“Basically that’s the way he sees himself,” said Drew Nieporent, the veteran restaurateur who is the chef’s primary business partner at Corton. “And the reality of Paul Liebrandt versus anybody else in New York is that his food and his approach to it —  you can’t compare it to anybody else. I don’t think you can. And that’s both good and bad.” At Corton, you don’t just drop in to have dinner; you go to marvel at the virtuosity. Intricately composed and blossoming with color, his dishes can look, on the plate, like edible bonsai corsages. His handiwork is so painterly that it can feel like desecration to dig a fork into it. (Lately his two tasting menus, priced at $125 and $155, have at times included a tribute to Cy Twombly, fashioned from skate, spring nettles and razor clams.)Mr. Nieporent concedes that their partnership is complicated. (Mr. Liebrandt declined even to discuss it.) It’s the sort of uneasy symbiosis you might find between a visionary painter and a perpetually hustling gallery owner. Mr. Liebrandt needs a downtown showcase for his oeuvre; Mr. Nieporent provides that, even when the oeuvre itself mystifies him.“Well, I work very hard at the relationship,” Mr. Nieporent said. At 58, he has backed 36 restaurants over the years and has a customer-centric philosophy that can be at odds, he suggested, with the aims of an auteur. “My whole thing has always been about accessibility and making it easier on the guest,” Mr. Nieporent said. “This has been a challenge. Because his food is anything but accessible. It takes submission.”To some extent Mr. Nieporent, too, must submit. He’s the restaurateur “famous for killing the goose that laid the golden egg,” as he put it, by firing David Bouley at Montrachet 27 years ago, but at Corton his core job is to stage the exhibition. He used a cinematic metaphor to explain it. “If the restaurateur is the director and the chef is the actor, you’re in an era now where the actor doesn’t want to listen to the director,” Mr. Nieporent said.Not even to praise, at times. “I think Paul’s food changes, and it changes rather rapidly, and sometimes you run the risk, if you compliment him about something, that then he’ll change that, too,” he said. Indeed, as creative people tend to do, Mr. Liebrandt is evolving. Corton is five years old now, and at the Elm, he plans to twist, refine and reimagine dishes from the classical canon: chicken Kiev, turbot for two, even quiche. “No one’s ever seen me open a restaurant, up to now, where it’s been more casual,” he said. “But I’ll tell you, I can make a mean steak frites. I can make a beautiful soupe de poisson.”As he ticked off what ingredients and methods might go into that Provençal fish soup, he spoke in a tone that came across as half reverie and half recipe. “Saffron and fennel and dried orange and orange blossom,” he said. “Cook it very gently with a beautiful, very light fond de poisson. Long and slow, then fresh tomatoes in there. Silky, smooth, beautiful.”9 PhotosView Slide Show ›Then he added this: “Cooking. Just cooking. That’s all.” Mr. Liebrandt, who apprenticed with game-changers like Pierre Gagnaire and Marco Pierre White, seems to regard the concept of “just cooking” as a refreshing, relaxing exhalation. At Corton, he goes to arduous extremes to achieve the textures and tastes he envisions.Lately he and his Corton team have gone to the trouble of dismantling an entire pig’s head primarily so they can extricate a few interior nuggets of meat and fat and transform them into something that, on the plate, winds up as just two or three bites of hyper-concentrated flavor. Over dinner at Bar Masa, the chef recalled one experiment that involved garnishing a side dish of silken tofu with a green-apple sabayon and “a little touch of plankton.” That’s right: the stuff whales eat. “Now, it didn’t taste bad,” Mr. Liebrandt said with a wry grin. “It didn’t look bad. Everything was technically perfect.” The reaction from customers, though, caused him to think twice. “They ate it, and the feedback I got was, ‘It’s very interesting,’ ” he said. “It’s an interesting taste. It’s not bad. But it’s not like, ‘I want to have a bowl of it.’ So unless they’re telling me they want to eat it again, then it’s useless to me. Because ultimately it’s food, and I want them to eat it again.”It is possible that Mr. Liebrandt’s complex relationship with rules and authority goes way back. When he was 7, his parents in London shuttled him off to a boarding school, and in his adolescent years he became a passionate fan of the Cure, the English band whose mascara-blotched, anemone-haired frontman, Robert Smith, still serves as an avatar for sulky and misunderstood teenagers of all ages. Mr. Liebrandt no longer wears his dark locks at a Cure-like length, but it is not hard to guess that he was a devotee. Something about him seems slightly mournful, perpetually misunderstood and, to quote the lyrics of Robert Smith, “alone, alone, alone upon a raging sea.”“Why am I perceived as pretentious?” Mr. Liebrandt asked. “I’m the farthest from it, I’m a very shy, very unpretentious kind of guy. But for whatever reason, people think that I’m this effete snob. Which is crazy. Ask anybody that knows me.”It’s not easy to find people who do know him, because Mr. Liebrandt isn’t the sort to pal around with fellow stove warriors in the wee hours. Even though he was the subject of an engrossing full-length documentary (“A Matter of Taste,” which came out in 2011),  other chefs still describe him as something of a mystery. “I’m trying to work on being more sociable,” he said. Lately, though, he has developed a rapport with someone who would appear to be his stylistic opposite: Danny Bowien, the man who introduced New York to kung pao pastrami and salt cod fried rice at Mission Chinese Food.When Mr. Bowien moved to New York from San Francisco last year, he made a beeline for Corton. “I’ve been to his restaurant a lot,” Mr. Bowien said. “He’s always been a crazy inspiration, although you may not see it in the food that we make.”Many chefs are able to suss out one another’s tricks, when a plate hits the table. At Corton, the sleight-of-hand isn’t so easily picked apart. “I feel like Paul is, like, six steps ahead of everyone else,” Mr. Bowien said. And the enigma is part of the appeal. “I don’t know if he wants people to understand him,” Mr. Bowien said. “Which makes him cooler, in a way.” There is no music playing at Corton; the stillness is so hushed, it calls to mind the near-motionless scenes in Stanley Kubrick movies. While it’s doubtful the Elm will have a beer keg on the floor, it’s clear that Mr. Liebrandt wants his new venture to have a looser mood. “I’ve been wanting to do a more accessible version of who I am for a while now,” he said. When entrepreneurs behind the King & Grove approached him, Mr. Liebrandt wondered whether he fit the type. “I’m not cool,” he said. “I’m not a hipster. I’m not trendy.” But he started venturing out to Williamsburg, and his explorations convinced him that the project made sense for him. “Real estate is expanding out there,” he said. “You have a huge market of young people that are independently wealthy, that have money, that want to have, obviously, good restaurants. And there are a lot of good restaurants.”He is now conjuring up a full menu for the Elm that will be broken down into four categories: raw, land, sea and shared. And because the restaurant occupies the ground floor of a hotel, Mr. Liebrandt will be responsible for everything from room service to poolside snacks. But why the name? Are there elm trees nearby? “I don’t know,” Mr. Liebrandt said, grinning again. “I haven’t looked. It’s a nice name. I just —  I liked it. Every name that I came up with, everybody looked at me and was like, ‘No, no.’ ” But, as with Cy Twombly and his wavy lines, instinct tugged him toward a precise arrangement of letters. “It’s The. Elm. It’s clean. It’s six letters. It fits very nicely,” he said. “Why not? Why not?” Advertisement