https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/04/fashion/mens-style/bob-ross-the-joy-of-painting.html
Bob Ross’s Strange Afterlife - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
114
AdvertisementSupported byLegaciesBy Foster KamerPeople who were out and about at various Chicago night spots on a night in September happened upon something surreal. They watched a throng of men and women, wearing frizzy wigs and identical oxford shirts, flood the neighborhood’s bars, drinking a round or two before moving on.This was the third annual Bob Ross Bar Crawl, which is exactly what it sounds like: more than 50 people dressed as their hero, the public-television icon Bob Ross, paying tribute in tavern after tavern, 20 years after his death.Jimmy Barrett, the event’s 26-year-old organizer, was 5 years old when Ross’s tutorial show, “The Joy of Painting,” was shown on 300 of 337 PBS stations nationwide. But while Mr. Barrett’s celebration of Ross may have once been driven by kitsch — a one-note Halloween party, writ large — his feelings for the man have evolved into a sincere appreciation.“As a kid, it was just: ‘Oh, here’s a guy in an Afro, painting,’” said Mr. Barrett, a web development project manager. “I’ve gone back and watched some clips, and some of the stuff he says is oddly inspiring.”For example: “There are no mistakes, just happy accidents.”Bob Ross died in 1995 at 52 after a battle with lymphoma, but his cultural legacy has grown in his absence.He was around to witness the beginnings of his own cult status. In the early ’90s, he was big in Japan. And MTV, catering to the Gen X penchant for irony, ran a series of promotional advertisements that featured him.With the rise of new generations, and new sensibilities, Ross has come to be appreciated as a comforting, ever-encouraging figure in a noisy culture. He is the ideal teacher who never judges, never raises his voice.“The majority of people who watch Bob have no interest in painting,” said Annette Kowalski, who urged Ross to go on TV in the ’80s. “They’re only interested in Bob’s persona, his whatever-it-is that relaxes people,” she said, laughing, “or puts them to sleep.”Ross and “The Joy of Painting” have become their own stripe of open-source cultural code: The man and his work have been remixed, meme-ified and repurposed by a fandom made up of digital natives, as in a 2013 segment of “Epic Rap Battles of History,” viewed more than 26 million times, that has him facing off against Pablo Picasso.And two decades after Ross painted his last “mighty mountains,” as he liked to call the snowcapped peaks he brought into being, often with the help of a palette knife, his PBS show is still on the air, presented as “The Best of the Joy of Painting.”The monomyth of Robert Norman Ross, the man behind all those “happy little trees” and “happy little clouds,” goes like this: He was born in Daytona Beach, Fla., dropped out of school as a ninth-grader and joined the Air Force at age 17 or 18 (accounts vary on this). He spent at least part of his 20-year military career stationed in Fairbanks, Alaska, and took painting classes at a U.S.O. club.It didn’t really click for him until he left the service and learned his “wet on wet” technique while studying under Bill Alexander, a German expatriate who hosted “The Magic of Oil Painting” on PBS from 1972 to 1982.Ross began teaching classes in Clearwater, Fla., and Ms. Kowalski was one of his students.“I was so mesmerized by him,” she said. “I didn’t paint. I just followed him around the room all day listening to the way he talks to people. And at the end of my five-day class with him, I said, ‘Bob, I don’t know what you’ve got, but I think we should bottle it and sell it.’”They went on to create a commercial to be aired during “The Phil Donahue Show.” As Ms. Kowalski explained it, the ad showed “Bill Alexander turning his brush over to Bob Ross.” (Later, the two men had a falling out, with Alexander telling The Times: “He betrayed me. I invented ‘wet on wet.’”)Soon after the “Donahue” spot came the first episode, in 1983, of “The Joy of Painting.” The series was taped at WIPB, a PBS station in Muncie, Ind.From the start, the formula was simple: The soft-spoken Ross, in his trusty perm and nearly identical outfits, patiently demonstrated his technique in an attempt to make relatively accomplished landscape painters out of his hobbyist viewers.The show seemed dated on arrival, but its serene New Age atmosphere, leavened with a dash of old-fashioned can-do spirit, gave it legs. By the early ’90s, Ross was seated atop a $15 million empire of books, videos and art supplies.The esteem for Ross has grown in the years since his death. So has the business of Bob Ross Inc., which Ms. Kowalski helps run. The privately owned company has about 20 employees and a warehouse in Chantilly, Va., where the sales and distribution of Bob Ross-branded painting products and Bob Ross instructor certification are managed.While millennials are keeping the flame alive, the interest in Ross has never really waned, according to Ms. Kowalski. “I’m not sure nostalgia’s the right word,” she said. “It’s just never stopped. It just keeps going.”And going. BuzzFeed has published “20 Essential Life Lessons From Bob Ross.” Google paid tribute to him with a Google doodle on what would have been his 70th birthday, in 2012. The ESPN website FiveThirtyEight has done a statistical analysis of his entire oeuvre. (Did you know that 44 percent of the 381 works he painted on his show had clouds in them?)The Original Fan Twitter Page of Bob Ross has 67,000 followers, and a few episodes of “The Joy of Painting” on the Bob Ross YouTube channel have been viewed more than 1 million times each.An online sect comprising enthusiasts of A.S.M.R. (autonomous sensory meridian response), who experience pleasurable physical sensations in response to certain sounds, holds him up as one of their gods because of his creamy voice. One of these people called him “the king of the tingles.”In September, it was announced that every episode of “The Joy of Painting” would be available for streaming on Amazon, iTunes and Hulu. In October, the video service Twitch, which is aimed mainly at video gamers, streamed “The Joy of Painting” in its entirety.According to a Twitch representative, 5.6 million unique users watched it at one point or another during its run, during which 7.6 million chat messages were sent. Audience outcry at the stream’s end, expressed through a #KEEPBOB hashtag on Twitter, persuaded Twitch to give “The Joy of Painting” a regular slot.There is even a robust secondary market for Bob Ross paintings on eBay, although his work is scoffed at by serious collectors. “We’ve seen the paintings go for $10,000,” Ms. Kowalski said.She has a theory about why Ross has endured. “If you listen closely to Bob’s programs, he never says ‘I’m going to teach you this,’” Ms. Kowalski said. “He never assumes that he knows more than you do. He says: ‘We’ll learn this together.’ And I think — even though people don’t realize it — I think that’s what his big turn-on is.”Advertisement