https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/10/opinion/letters/meritocracy.html
Opinion | Paths to Fulfillment, Barriers to Success - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
4
AdvertisementSupported bylettersReaders respond to David Brooks’s column about the peaks and valleys on the path of life. To the Editor:Re “The Moral Peril of Meritocracy,” by David Brooks (Sunday Review, April 7):While “The Second Mountain: The Quest for a Moral Life,” the title of Mr. Brooks’s new book, is a compelling one, it is less than an ideal road map for achieving profound change and personal growth. A mountain in the distance is too daunting a climb for most people. Steps forward, one at a time, are more likely to result in sustained effort. Our motives are never pure. A journey toward meaning requires repeated trial and error, and progress is assured when we have the humility to assess ourselves and the courage to consider a multitude of opinions.People today prioritize convenience. Venture capital fuels a proliferation of apps and text therapies that hold the promise of quick symptomatic relief and an antidote to loneliness. If the goal is fulfillment and happiness, however, group therapy, a much-neglected mode of treatment, is more effective. Groups enable people to experience the universality of our flaws and provide the opportunity to practice altruism. A journey with diverse and well-meaning people is a slow haul. But it’s the best way to travel.Frederic KassNew YorkThe writer is a clinical professor of psychiatry at Columbia University Irving Medical Center.To the Editor:While reading David Brooks’s article, I was struck by a sudden sense of self-recognition. It became apparent that my own life was following the “two mountain” scenario outlined in the essay. First mountain phase: great education, followed by the requisite career advancement. Valley phase: divorce followed by incarceration and the sense that my life could fall no further. And then the realization that what is truly important in life ultimately has very little to do with career advancement and ego but everything to do with the care I put into my relationships with family and friends.Second mountain phase: committing to a life and second career in which these rediscovered values become the guiding principles of my day-to-day activities. One would think that people would have the self-awareness necessary to understand these types of things in their own lives as they are occurring, but in my case this was certainly not true. Sometimes it takes the observations of someone outside the trenches of your own existence (in this case, Mr. Brooks) to allow you to see clearly the path your own life is taking. Scott P. GilbertAlbanyTo the Editor:Women are often confronted early with the choices and the unfairness of the supposed meritocracy: Do I step back to raise a family? Why am I not moving ahead when I am doing everything the guys are doing? Why am I not paid the same for the same work? How do I handle a boss who has control over my career and is sending out uncomfortable signals?We are often forced to craft a life based on the “second mountain” before we even get a chance to scale Mountain 1. I am sympathetic with those forced to choose the second mountain as described by David Brooks. But I think that he may not realize how inaccessible Mountain 1 is for the population that is not white and male.Judith BunnellWashingtonAdvertisement