https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/10/dining/lamoon-review-elmhurst.html
Thai Dishes That Pave a Chef’s Path Home in Elmhurst, Queens - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1985
AdvertisementSupported byHungry City10 PhotosView Slide Show ›By Ligaya MishanThe banana leaves make a small tent on the plate at Lamoon, a Thai restaurant in Elmhurst, Queens. Unhooked, they fall flat, revealing a mound of rice larded with ground pork and stained purple-black: the color of pork blood, its metallic scent softened by a squeeze of smashed lemongrass.The dish, called khao kan jin and often eaten as a snack in northern Thailand, suggests a blood sausage with the ratios radically recalibrated, more rice than pork. There’s no snap of skin; the stickiness of the rice holds it together. It’s simply steamed, the flavor gentle and fortifying, leaving the faintest trace of iron on the tongue.Arada Moonroj, the chef, opened Lamoon in March with her husband, Jugkrwut Borin, and Piboon Thongtanyong, known as Otto. Lamoon has “many meanings,” Mr. Thongtanyong explained: It’s a Thai word that connotes delicacy, softness and tender care, with an echo of the chef’s last name.An artist from Bangkok flew in to paint murals on the close-set walls, of women in gold headdresses with cascading red and green hair. A cluster of lamps, their white shades dipped in blue ombre, meant to evoke the sky lanterns released en masse for the full-moon Yi Peng Festival, drifting into the night.The food draws from Ms. Moonroj’s upbringing in Lampang in northern Thailand: coins of sai ua, pork sausage made in-house with a crunchy riddle of pig’s ear; frilly hearts of red cotton flowers in a heady stew of pork ribs, ground pork and pork blood, both loose and set in spongy cubes, a kind of mineral-tinged tofu; and red ant eggs resembling swollen grains of rice, clinging to strands of shredded mango alongside anchovies crisped in sesame oil until they become fossils of themselves.Young jackfruit, not yet sweet, is boiled and pounded in a mortar until it gives. It’s flung in a pan with ground pork belly and emerges almost as meaty in texture. But the flavor is all herbs, half registered as fragrance — galangal and sun-baked earth, bright threads of kaffir lime leaves, and cilantro roots, subtler and more profound than the stems.Nam prik ong comes in a small bowl — too small, you think, until you taste it. Although flanked by blades of romaine and pork skins like ossified fluff, it defies the word “dip”: It’s a swirl of ground pork, as thick as ragù, with an undersea punch of shrimp paste and fermented soybeans. Thai bird chiles are out in force. For a moment, no other dish exists.Ms. Moonroj makes larb neua from a recipe of her mother’s, with ground pork belly and liver, a play of fat and cream. Unlike larb in southern Thailand, it abstains from sourness and rice powder, instead relying on herbs and spices, each toasted separately to coax out its fragrance, then left to quietly become one with the pork for an hour before cooking.The heat breaks late and lasts. For a few long minutes, it may take over the mouth entirely; other dishes must wait. The source: A smoke-haunted paste of dried chiles, long pepper — stronger than black pepper, more expansive and musky-sweet — and makhwaen seeds, kin to Sichuan peppercorn, for a faint kiss of lemon before your mouth goes numb.This is thoughtful, detailed cooking. Khao soi, a curry soup, achieves a muted sweetness from a touch of coconut sugar and white onions cooked down until near liquid, then pulverized in a blender and returned to the pan. Even snacks show precision, like a mob of baby shrimp conjured into little cakes of fried mist.At the end, there is half a mango, neatly crosshatched, and a rainbow of sticky rice balls, saturated with coconut milk. No food colorings are used: Thai iced tea turns the grains burnt orange, gardenia fruit yields yellow, and butterfly pea flower is boiled until its petals stream blue.Ms. Moonroj has never cooked at a restaurant before. Her menu is a path home, mixing memories of Lampang with visits to her father in the town of Mae Hong Son, near the Thai border with Myanmar.From there, she imports the paste for kang huy lay, a pork belly curry that’s a mellow confluence of ginger and garlic, both fresh and pickled, and lulling. It’s ideal, she said, for balancing the fattiness of the meat, which arrives a shrug away from melting.The meat is rich, but you feel good afterward, she said. “The smell is like medicine.”This information was last updated on Nov. 17, 2018Advertisement