https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/01/books/review/dinosaur-artist-paige-williams.html
The Bizarre Tale of the ‘Dinosaur Artist’ Who Trafficked in Stolen Fossils - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2207
AdvertisementSupported byNonfictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Peter BrannenTHE DINOSAUR ARTIST Obsession, Betrayal, and the Quest for Earth’s Ultimate Trophy By Paige Williams 410 pp. Hachette. $28.As far as case law goes, there are more consequential decisions than The United States of America v. One Tyrannosaurus Bataar Skeleton. Few, however, feature a more charismatic defendant.In 2013, the United States literally arrested the skeleton of a giant apex predator dinosaur slumbering in a warehouse in Queens. But understanding how this came to be first requires a panoptic survey of everything from the world of the Late Cretaceous period to the 1990s rise of right-wing politics in Mongolia. This is the dizzying task that Paige Williams, a staff writer for The New Yorker, has set for herself in “The Dinosaur Artist: Obsession, Betrayal and the Quest for Earth’s Ultimate Trophy.” What began for her as the tale of an unusual court case involving a rogue fossil hunter unspools in this book into a wide-ranging examination of the ways that commercialism, ambition, politics and science collide. (Just a glance at some of the index’s entries reveals the scope: Genghis Khan, Newt Gingrich, St. Augustine, Stegosaurus and Preet Bharara.)When this “big, sexy” — and, to paleontologists, obviously illegal — dinosaur appears on the auction block in New York City, commercial and academic worlds alike are aghast. Simply put, the dinosaur is from Mongolia and you can’t sell dinosaurs from Mongolia. Behind the stolen bones is Eric Prokopi, who overnight becomes “either the bravest or most reckless son of a bitch” other fossil dealers had ever seen.The life of a globe-trotting dinosaur smuggler might bring to mind Thomas Crown meets Tintin, but one of the revelations of the book is just how mundane the skulduggery of Prokopi’s crime actually was. He simply went to trade shows, saw who was dealing hot fossils in the open and made contacts. After repeated jaunts across the world to meet with an extremely shady (and often extremely drunken) Mongolian middleman, Prokopi establishes a pipeline for his purloined paleontological finds. As a reader, being given entry by Williams into this underworld, privy to the secret knowledge of a black market, is a thrill.As Prokopi’s financial situation becomes increasingly tenuous, these dinosaur bones become his only hope for avoiding ruin. “A batch of dinosaurs would put everything straight,” Williams writes at one point, as the noose tightens. It’s hard not to feel for Prokopi, who ultimately ends up in prison for his smuggling. The only crime that would seem to separate him from the other dealers who had long peddled hot bones in the open at the Tucson Gem & Mineral Society, and elsewhere, is sheer audacity — that is, flying too close to the sun on the pathetic, undersize forearms of T. bataar.The strange underground world Prokopi inhabits inevitably brings us in contact with some serious oddballs, each of whom is introduced by Williams with the economy and evocative precision of a haiku. In affectless, purposeful prose we get a stream of increasingly strange and piquant factoids about these people, who seem to emerge straight out of a Coen brothers movie: One fossil dealer likes cockroaches, Milton Friedman and Greek triremes. Prokopi’s mother is a nudist, while his mentor is a former door-to-door crab salesman who once won a soap-selling contest. The father of a character introduced in the epilogue has a “love affair” with a bottlenose dolphin — although, by that point in the book, nothing would seem eccentric enough to warrant surprise. All of this is presented from a narrative God’s-eye view, and Williams so skillfully conceals the sausage-making of reporting that when we’re told, for instance, what someone was thinking while urinating in the desert in the middle of the night several years ago, we accept it as truth.But where the strange, seedy human world of the dinosaur artist is richly realized, less so is the alien world of the dinosaur at the center of the story itself. There is no introduction to the lost world these monsters stalked, what Mongolia was like 70 million years ago, or how a creature as preposterous as T. bataar ever came to exist on our planet. Besides a few unavoidable references to the creature’s specifications and bite strength, for the most part the dinosaur at the center of the story serves the role of MacGuffin.That’s because at heart, this is not a book about dinosaurs, it’s a book about people; a true-crime book, and a thoroughly reported one at that. It is peppered with useful précis on towering figures from natural history — we join the 19th-century naturalist and savant Mary Anning, for instance, plying the Jurassic Coast for ichthyosaurs, and stand with the father of Deep Time himself, James Hutton, as he stares down the abyss of time represented in an outcrop in Scotland, contemplating the successive layers of earth that created it. But such potted histories are eddies in the narrative stream that carries Eric Prokopi from taciturn Florida high school swim star to eventual bone smuggler and felon.In the end Prokopi, like T. bataar, remains something of a cipher in spite of Williams’s nanoscale examination of him, his family, friends, associates, finances, even home décor. Sometimes this intimacy borders on overexposure, though it also produces some arresting vignettes: One of the most effective passages meticulously recounts Prokopi’s drive to prison in order to surrender — a trip rendered both comically mundane and dreadful. But Prokopi himself, who doesn’t say much and seems constitutionally incapable of showing his cards, remains elusive.Instead, the book’s most memorable character may be Mongolia itself, a rugged physical and political terrain that defies easy generalization or the exoticizing accounts of Westerners. We pick up the thread with the mind-blowing global conquests of Genghis Khan and follow it through to the early 20th century, and the accounts of the American naturalist and inveterate self-promoter Roy Chapman Andrews, who briefly descended on Mongolia on behalf of the American Museum of Natural History, forging there a romantic persona as a man committed to digging up dinosaurs. Andrews’s life is almost too colorful to recount, and the contributions he made to popular interest in paleontology were real and lasting. But as with many sepia-toned institutional heroes, the luster of his accomplishments has dimmed in retrospect, not least because he minimized the contributions of his Mongolian assistants in service of a queasy American imperialism. In 1932, the Natural History Museum pulled out of the country as Mongolia descended into Stalinist Communism, executing 30,000 intellectuals and Buddhist leaders, eradicating traditional garb, Mongolian vertical script and Khan as a symbol of national pride — all bourgeois indulgences.Sixty years later, when Communism fell, the country was once more flooded with opportunistic Americans, many of them hatched in right-wing American think tanks. It was in the wake of this post-Soviet moment of free-market national ransacking that Prokopi found an opening to extract the country’s dinosaur heritage. But just as Khan was suddenly loosed from his symbolic exile and restored as a totem of national pride when Communism fell, when Prokopi falls, hope for a future of Mongolian self-determination comes in the form of a far more ancient, even fiercer symbol of restored national pride: T. bataar.Peter Brannen is the author of “The Ends of the World.”Advertisement