https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/04/business/media/att-warner-greenblatt.html
AT&T Assembles a Media Team, Joining a Battle With Giants - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1791
AdvertisementSupported byBy Edmund Lee and John KoblinThe new AT&T is coming into focus.On Monday the company took a step closer to becoming something never before seen on the American corporate landscape — part telecommunications behemoth and part media-entertainment giant.The transformation started in earnest last June when AT&T, based in Dallas, ventured beyond its core business and muscled into New York and Los Angeles with its $85.4 billion acquisition of Time Warner, the former home of HBO, the Warner Bros. movie studio, CNN and cable channels like TBS and TNT. Last week, the deal was set in stone when the Justice Department, after losing a hard-fought appeal to block it, said it would no longer try to undo the merger.With this final green light, AT&T has in recent days altered its leadership team with an eye toward reinvention.On Monday, the company named Robert Greenblatt, the former head of entertainment at NBC and Showtime, as the new chairman at Warner Media, a job that will give him oversight of Time Warner properties like HBO, TBS and TNT. His hiring followed the resignations of Richard Plepler, the longtime chief executive of HBO, and David Levy, the president of Turner Broadcasting, the division that includes TBS and TNT.As part of its executive shake-up, AT&T — which gained 26,000 employees in the merger, giving it 268,000 worldwide — also promoted the CNN chief Jeff Zucker and the Warner Bros. studio head Kevin Tsujihara, both of whom will oversee bigger portfolios.John Stankey, an AT&T veteran who was put in charge of Warner Media at the time of the acquisition, is the executive behind the moves, which show that the company is serious about tearing up old ways and putting its own stamp on its new properties. The company’s two core businesses are both facing upheaval as tech companies like Amazon, Netflix, Apple, Google and Facebook have become dominant players in both entertainment and distribution.“If you don’t make a change, you’re not going to get any change in the product,” Mr. Stankey said in an interview on Monday.Mr. Stankey’s assignment is to help AT&T beat out its traditional rivals Verizon, T-Mobile and Sprint by offering not only service plans but also “Game of Thrones” and 24-hour news. At the same time, AT&T’s entry into the media sphere will eventually allow it to compete in the streaming business against companies it has rarely done battle with before, including the Walt Disney Company, Comcast, Netflix, Amazon and others.He emphasized that AT&T didn’t want to muddy the brands within Warner Media, a group comprising HBO, CNN, TNT, Cartoon Network and the Warner Bros. film and TV studios.“We just needed to get them to sing and dance differently and have them take different approaches,” he added.With the hiring of Mr. Greenblatt — who has experience as a mainstream broadcaster at NBC and as a programmer of prestige cable fare at Showtime — Mr. Stankey believes he has someone who can make Warner Media’s offerings broadly popular, without losing their distinctive identities.“There aren’t that many people who have both,” Mr. Stankey said. “He’s got the right track record.”Mr. Greenblatt, who goes by Bob, took over as chairman of NBC in 2011, when the network was in dire straits. Over his seven years, he brought NBC back from the dead with series like “The Voice,” Dick Wolf’s fleet of Chicago shows and “This Is Us.” NBC, which he left in September, now regularly finishes No. 1 among the advertiser-prized group of 18-to-49-year-old viewers.In a statement, Mr. Greenblatt said, “I’m honored to be joining Warner Media during such an exciting time for the company and the industry as a whole, and I look forward to working alongside the many talented executives and team members across the company.”While overseeing HBO and the like, Mr. Greenblatt will also manage the product that may be the most important of all, from AT&T’s perspective: Warner Media’s streaming service, which is scheduled to debut this year.AT&T on Monday announced a set of sweeping management changes at WarnerMedia as the carrier prepares to debut a streaming service later this year.New roles at WarnerMediaRobert GreenblattJeffrey ZuckerKevin TsujiharaFormer head of entertainmentat NBC and ShowtimeCurrent headof CNNCurrent chief executive of theWarner Bros. movie studioWILL CONTINUE IN THAT JOB,AND HEAD:WILL CONTINUE IN THAT JOB,AND HEAD:WILL HEAD:WarnerMediaEntertainmentWarnerMediaNews & SportsWarnerMedia GlobalKids & Young AdultsIncludes HBO, cable networks TNT, TBS and truTV, and the Direct-to-Consumer business. Includes CNN, Turner Sports, Bleacher Report and the AT&T Regional Sports Networks.A new division for family and kids programming including Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Boomerang, Otter Media, Turner Classic Movies and licensed consumer products.New roles at WarnerMediaRobert GreenblattFormer head of entertainmentat NBC and ShowtimeWILL HEAD:WarnerMedia EntertainmentIncludes HBO, cable networks TNT, TBS and truTV, and the Direct-to-Consumer business. Jeffrey ZuckerCurrent headof CNNWILL CONTINUE IN THAT JOB,AND HEAD:WarnerMedia News & SportsIncludes CNN, Turner Sports, Bleacher Report and the AT&T Regional Sports Networks.Kevin TsujiharaCurrent chief executive of theWarner Bros. movie studioWILL CONTINUE IN THAT JOB,AND HEAD:WarnerMedia Global Kids & Young AdultsA new division for family and kids programming including Cartoon Network, Adult Swim, Boomerang, Otter Media, Turner Classic Movies and licensed consumer products.By The New York TimesOnline video has become crucial to every media business as customers cut their cable cords and go to the movies mainly for big-spectacle blockbusters. Netflix and Hulu are signing up millions of new customers every quarter, and entertainment giants like Disney and Comcast plan to start their own services by the end of the year. Amazon is spending more on original shows, and Apple plans to unveil its streaming effort, with new programming, this year.The appointment of Mr. Greenblatt allows Warner Media to speed up its plans for a streaming business, a process that was hampered under the older structure, Mr. Stankey said.“We had to put a bit of a Band-Aid organization on top of things before we made this change,” he said. “Still, I think we’ve done a remarkable job with what we had. The new combined WarnerMedia will be much more successful filling in the gaps.“AT&T was handcuffed until recently as it fought a lawsuit brought by the Trump administration’s Justice Department to block the merger. The company agreed to take a hands-off approach to its Turner division, which includes CNN and TNT, until the appeal was concluded. AT&T beat back that challenge last week, giving the company free rein.Concerning the resignations of Mr. Plepler, who had been at HBO for 27 years, and Mr. Levy, who had spent 32 years at Turner Broadcasting, Mr. Stankey said, “I was disappointed but I don’t know that I was completely surprised.” He added, “When you have someone who had a tremendous amount of autonomy, they tend to covet that.”Mr. Stankey plans to be a much more active steward of Warner Media than its executives had anticipated, three people familiar with the new AT&T said. He has started to consolidate advertising, distribution and production departments across Turner and HBO, as well as some of the back-end functions like human resources, accounting and technology. Those moves effectively took away large chunks of matters once overseen by Mr. Plepler and Mr. Levy, the people said.In Mr. Stankey’s view, Warner Media needed to reorganize the TV networks in a way “where they could cooperate more together,” he said, which meant that some top executives would have reduced roles. He said his discussions with Mr. Plepler and Mr. Levy, which took place separately, never got far enough to explore what roles they each might accept.Going up against Netflix and Disney will be tough. Mr. Stankey acknowledged that a household is likely to pay for just four or five of these services, and that AT&T will have to prove its worth to consumers.At a company presentation in November, he outlined three tiers of online video services that have been in the works: an entry-level option centered on films; a “premium” service that includes original television programming and films; and a final product that includes both of those tiers plus classic movies, comedy and children’s content. Under the plan, HBO would still be available as a stand-alone service.But it is unclear which Warner Media brands will be part of each tier or how each will be priced. Even the names of the video services remain a mystery.“No news on that today,” Mr. Stankey said on Monday.The lack of hard information on the streaming strategy has frustrated executives within Warner Media, several people familiar with the internal operations have said. But some have wondered if the lack of communication was the result of the Justice Department’s court challenge.Mr. Stankey acknowledged that his sometimes laconic approach might have baffled those inside the organization. “I’ve read articles out there saying that I’m not prone to flap my gums, and that may not be inaccurate,” he said. But Hollywood, not used to such a reserved manner, might require him to open up more. “I’m trying to find a middle ground on it,” he said, adding that with the lawsuit behind them, he’ll be able to talk more frequently.As part of the reorganization, Mr. Zucker, the head of CNN, will also begin to oversee Turner’s sports operations. That includes the website Bleacher Report, as well as Turner’s deals with the National Basketball Association, Major League Baseball and the National Collegiate Athletic Association. With the job, Mr. Zucker gets a new title: chairman of news and sports.Mr. Tsujihara, the chief executive of the Warner Bros. movie studio, will continue in his position and also take on what Warner Media described as a “new global kids and young adults business.” Children’s content is likely to be a critical part of the streaming service and represents a big part of Mr. Tsujihara’s portfolio.“As the economics change, it’s becoming more and more important to align content value, consumer products and ad sales,” Mr. Tsujihara said in an interview. “It takes a real need for deeper level of coordination across the different divisions.”Advertisement