https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/03/nyregion/korean-barbecue-and-karaoke-in-brooklyn-at-insa.html
At Insa in Brooklyn, a Mix of Karaoke and Korean Barbecue - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2124
AdvertisementSupported byAt the TableBy Alan FeuerThough Brooklyn has its share of hybrid operations, like a barbershop where you can get a cocktail, it has suffered from a lack of fine-dining karaoke joints, which have traditionally clustered in Koreatown, in Manhattan in the 30s. But just two weeks ago, the restaurant Insa opened in Gowanus, offering a wide array of Korean barbecue dishes and after-dinner entertainment in one of five karaoke rooms with wacky themes. Owned by Sohui Kim and Ben Schneider, the married couple behind the Good Fork in Red Hook, Insa, which occupies a sprawling former warehouse at 328 Douglass Street, may be the only place in Brooklyn where you can cook cuttlefish and octopus on your table grill and then repair to the Jungle Room for a performance of “Hound Dog.” Last week, a group of Brooklynites was planning to do precisely that — albeit with a bit more food and without the Elvis.IN THE SEATS The host of the evening — sort of — Kay Ch’ien, 35, who will soon be relaunching 2 Duck Goose, her temporarily closed restaurant in Gowanus; Ms. Ch’ien’s husband, Zack Yorke, 34, a researcher at Google; Ms. Ch’ien’s brother, Karsten Ch’ien, 28, who is in the prelaunch phase of Yumami, a start-up selling, as he put it, “high-protein Asian-inspired snack packs”; the Ch’iens’ cousin, Suyin So, 40, the executive director of the Central Queens Academy Charter School; and Ms. So’s old friend from computer camp, Gary Chou, 41, the founder of Orbital, an incubator space — sort of — on the Lower East Side, designed to launch creative projects and businesses.ON THE PLATES A shared feast ordered by Ms. Ch’ien: seafood corn dogs ($15), a half order of fried chicken ($18; a whole order is available for $32), one order of meat dumplings with pork, beef and chives and one of vegetable dumplings with kimchi (both $14), Yangnyeom Galbi marinated short ribs ($35), Chadolbaegi thinly sliced beef brisket ($28) and an order of ox bone soup ($17).WHY THEY CAME “We wanted to try a new Korean restaurant,” Ms. So said. And since all of them live in Brooklyn, they came to Gowanus. There was, as well, an ulterior motive — sort of — in that Ms. Ch’ien is tinkering with a new concept for 2 Duck Goose, which was named Best Restaurant in Gowanus in 2014 by the Village Voice, and wanted to check out the competition. Then, of course, there was the matter of the karaoke.WHAT THEY TALKED ABOUT At first, entrepreneurship. As Ms. Ch’ien pointed out, all of them were entrepreneurs — sort of. She had 2 Duck Goose; Mr. Chou had Orbital; Ms. So had the charter school; Mr. Ch’ien had his high-protein Asian-inspired snack packs; and Mr. Yorke was at Google. But what really got their conversation going was what they were going to sing for karaoke. Right away, Mr. Yorke laid claim to John Mellencamp. Ms. So was thinking about a bit of Steely Dan. It was Hall & Oates for Mr. Chou, and some ’90s Cantopop — Cantonese pop — for Ms. Ch’ien. As for Mr. Ch’ien, he said, “I’m constantly on a search for a karaoke place with the largest Broadway collection I can find.” Which sounded great, sort of.Advertisement