https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/09/books/review/jenny-offills-dept-of-speculation.html
Jenny Offill’s ‘Dept. of Speculation’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1768
AdvertisementSupported byBy Roxane Gay(This book was selected as one of The New York Times Book Review’s 10 Best Books of 2014. For the rest of the list, click here.)As a Finnish proverb reportedly has it, love is a flower that turns into fruit at marriage. In contemporary fiction, though, that fruit is often spoiled, and its faintly reeking rot gives purpose to a great many novels exploring the notion that staying true to one person for the rest of your life and raising children (or, sometimes, not) are difficult, complex, unknowable endeavors. This is the mythology and often enough the truth of marriage, and novelists are forever reaching for the right words to capture it.Jenny Offill’s second novel, “Dept. of Speculation,” charts the course of a marriage through curious, often shimmering fragments of prose. A writer lives in Brooklyn. A writer lives in Brooklyn and falls in love. A writer in Brooklyn marries and has a child. A married writer in Brooklyn lives, and then there are bedbugs. The novel is, at times, reminiscent of Renata Adler’s “Speedboat” with a less bitter edge. Seemingly significant information is doled out in inscrutable doses. Each fragment is satisfying or not, and exists unto itself but also, clearly, as part of something bigger. “Dept. of Speculation” moves quickly, but it is also joyously demanding because you will want to keep trying to understand the why of each fragment and how it fits with the others.The narrator offers observations like: “The Buddhists say there are 121 states of consciousness. Of these, only three involve misery or suffering. Most of us spend our time moving back and forth between these three.” There is gravity to the mere idea of Buddhism. We’re supposed to do something with this information, right? There is meaning here, whether about marriage or love or life or all of the above, but the precise nature of that meaning is never fully revealed. Yet ­Offill is a smart writer with a canny sense of pacing; just when you want to abandon the fragmented puzzle pieces of the novel, she reveals a moment of breathtaking tenderness. Here for instance is the narrator remembering the early days of her relationship: “I bought a warmer coat with many ingenious pockets. You put your hands in all of them.” Details like this cast welcome light on the couple’s history and intimacy.Offill builds a story out of these fragments, observations and other mental detritus. There is a sister and a philosopher friend. There is the narrator and the man at the center of the novel, the man she falls in love with, the man she marries, the man she has a child with, the man who ultimately fails her. Over the course of their marriage there are jobs and dinners with friends and sleepless nights. No modern Brooklyn love story would be complete without bedbugs, so there is also that urban tragedy. There is the looming threat of an unfinished second novel that plagues both narrator and reader. What is this novel? Why hasn’t it been written? This particular plot point feels very self-referential — a wink and a nod to writers who deal with the quiet but insistent pressure of the next thing after the memory of the first thing has nearly faded.“Dept. of Speculation” is especially engaging when it describes new motherhood — the stunned joy and loneliness and fatigue of it, the new orientation of the narrator’s world around an impossibly small but demanding creature. And just when you think you understand the novel’s cadence, Offill offers up a stunning line like: “But the smell of her hair. The way she clasped her hand around my fingers. This was like medicine. For once, I didn’t have to think. The animal was ascendant.” There is a primal energy in these passages, the tension of a modern woman giving in to the raw urge of motherhood.From this raw energy rises the most engaging person in the novel. From her infancy onward, the unnamed daughter who is precocious without being cloying, moderate with her affection, deliberate in her ways, is by far the most intriguing person in the ongoing drama. Then, sadly, she drifts out of the story because she is older, because the marriage is older, because the story, inevitably, must grow in a different direction.Or this is the story of a me and a you and then a she and a him and finally a you, a me, an us, as Offill deftly moves the novel forward with elegant shifts of point of view. First, we are part of the marriage and then we are studying the marriage from a distance as things begin to fall apart. There is an infidelity and an excruciating period of indecision and self-doubt as the wife, as she is now known, tries to assess her role in the marriage coming apart, and as she determines the right and proper shape for her anger.The wife’s pain and sorrow are rendered through a wryer brand of observation as she becomes the betrayed. It is easy to feel for her because she is a desperately interesting character. Each newly disclosed flaw only makes her more compelling. In fact, we know everything about the wife and how she thinks and feels and moves through the world. It is much more difficult to feel anything about the marriage because the husband is so secondary a character. He is an accessory and a bit player in the wife’s meditations.When we do learn anything about the you, the husband, it is by way of the wife setting herself up for fallibility by depicting him as infallible. “He is famously kind, my husband. . . . He’s from Ohio. This means he never forgets to thank the bus driver or pushes in front at the baggage claim.” And then: “This is another way in which he is an admirable person. If he notices something is broken, he will try to fix it. He won’t just think about how unbearable it is that things keep breaking, that you can never . . . outrun entropy.” It all seems too deliberate, setting the husband up in this way.Of course he falls because he has been placed, quite grandly, on a pedestal for the wife to admire him more than actually be married to him. But maybe that is what happens in love and marriage. We admire from a distance, and we look away when we get too close and see what is actually there.As the husband and wife try to repair their relationship, he often seems petulant and repulsively indistinct while the wife becomes ever more complicated. For better or worse, this is not so much a book about their marriage; it is a book about the wife’s marriage. It would be interesting to read the other story to this marriage, to know more of the husband, the father — but Offill still makes it seem as if the wife’s version of the marriage is story enough and, perhaps, the only story that matters. The book calls to mind another proverb, this one from Madagascar: Marriage is not a tight knot, but a slip knot.DEPT. OF SPECULATIONBy Jenny Offill179 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.Roxane Gay’s novel, “An Untamed State,” will be published in May, and her essay collection, “Bad Feminist,” in August.Advertisement