https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/learning/film-club-another-kind-of-girl.html
Film Club: ‘Another Kind of Girl’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
792
AdvertisementSupported byFilm ClubBy Natalie ProulxHow can a challenging experience make a person stronger?“Another Kind of Girl” is a 10-minute film that touches on themes of courage, resilience and speaking one’s truth. It is filmed and narrated by Khaldiya, a 17-year-old Syrian refugee living in a refugee camp in Jordan. She describes what her life inside the camp is like and how the experience has changed her and her family.Students1. Watch the short film above. While you watch, you might take notes using our Film Club Double-Entry Journal (PDF) to help you remember specific moments.2. After watching, think about these questions:• What moments in this film stood out for you? Why?• Were there any surprises? Anything that challenged what you know — or thought you knew?• What messages, emotions or ideas will you take away from this film? Why?• What questions do you still have?3. An additional challenge: What connections can you make between this film and your own life or experience? Why? Does this film remind you of anything else you’ve read or seen? If so, how and why?4. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment, although teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students have to say.)5. After you have posted, try reading back to see what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting another comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.6. To learn more, read “Another Kind of Girl.” Khaldiya writes:When I arrived at the Za’atari refugee camp in Jordan three years ago, I was overwhelmed. My family left our village in the region of Syria where the revolution began, after the area was bombed. My mother and six younger siblings and I suddenly became eight of the world’s 4.5 million Syrian refugees, and we have been living with 80,000 of them in our camp ever since.Life in a refugee camp was different from what I’d expected. While it is hard in many ways, it has challenged me to be stronger and more independent._________More?• See all the films in this series.• Read our list of practical teaching ideas, along with responses from students and teachers, for how you can use these documentaries in the classroom.• Our next Film Club will take place on Thursday, May 2.Advertisement