https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/31/books/review/mona-hanna-attisha-what-the-eyes-dont-see-anna-clark-poisoned-city.html
Two Views of Flint’s Water Troubles: One a Close-Up and One With a Wide-Angle Lens - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2238
AdvertisementSupported byNonfictionBy Jeff GoodellWHAT THE EYES DON’T SEE A Story of Crisis, Resistance, and Hope in an American City By Mona Hanna-Attisha Illustrated. 364 pp. One World. $28.THE POISONED CITY Flint’s Water and the American Urban Tragedy By Anna Clark 305 pp. Metropolitan Books/Henry Holt & Company. $30.On a cool spring day in April 2014, Dayne Walling, the mayor of Flint, Mich., entered an old water-treatment plant and, amid cheers from a crowd of city officials and engineers, pushed a small black button on a cinder-block wall. With that gesture, the mayor switched Flint’s water supply from a tested and reliable source provided by the city of Detroit to a cheaper and untested one, the nearby Flint River. City officials defended the move as necessary cost-cutting for a bankrupt city. Like his colleagues, Walling — a Rhodes scholar who had a master’s degree in urban studies — believed that Flint, by deciding to rely on its own river for water, was taking control of its destiny. He called it “a historic moment.”He was certainly right about that, although probably not in the way he foresaw. By changing the source of the city’s water, Walling and other local and state officials touched off a chain of events that led to one of the biggest public-health disasters of our time. The water from the Flint River turned out to be highly corrosive, causing the city’s old pipes to leach lead into the drinking water. Lead has been known for decades to cause irreversible damage to human brains and nervous systems, especially children’s. Yet in Flint, a predominantly African-American city, nobody worried too much about it. City officials ignored laws requiring that anti-corrosion agents be added to the water to reduce the risk of lead buildup. Water tests were done haphazardly. Officials rigged data and intimidated activists. Thousands of kids drank water that may have permanently harmed their brains.This “is the story of a government poisoning its own citizens, and then lying about it,” Mona Hanna-Attisha writes in her gripping memoir about the crisis, “What the Eyes Don’t See.” “It is a story about what happens when the very people responsible for keeping us safe care more about money and power than they care about us, or our children.”If there is anyone well positioned to make this argument, it’s Hanna-Attisha, the director of the pediatric residency program at Hurley Medical Center, a teaching hospital affiliated with Michigan State University. Hanna-Attisha’s analysis of Flint residents’ blood tests proved indisputably that they were being poisoned and exposed the official denials and obfuscation as a crime of tragic proportions. She is disarmingly modest about her role. “I was just the last piece,” she writes near the end of the book. “The state wouldn’t stop lying until somebody came along to prove that real harm was being done to kids. Then the house of cards fell.”Hanna-Attisha’s book covers a monthlong period in the middle of the crisis, roughly from the moment she learned about lead in Flint’s water to a news conference she held announcing test results showing high lead levels in residents’ blood. Hanna-Attisha is a chatty and entertaining narrator. And while I’m not sure I needed to hear about her mother’s crepes with “gooey Nutella on top,” or to eavesdrop on her pillow talk with her husband about the emotional drama of the day, these are minor sins.Her book has power precisely because she takes the events she recounts so personally. Before she knew Flint’s water was contaminated, Hanna-Attisha encouraged mothers who came to her clinic to mix baby formula with tap water; the guilt she later feels is heart-rending. As a mother and a pediatrician, she also understands the vulnerability of children in a city like Flint, where, she points out, the life span of the average child is 15 years shorter than that of a child born in a neighboring suburb. “When I found out that a group home for abused and neglected kids near the hospital had a water-lead level over 5,000” parts per billion, she writes, “I was the maddest and saddest I’d ever been in my life.” (The federally mandated action level for lead in drinking water is 15 parts per billion.)For Hanna-Attisha, Flint’s water crisis was not just a personal tragedy but a betrayal of the American dream. Her mother and father were born in Iraq and watched with horror from abroad as their country was overtaken by the fundamentalist regime that eventually led to Saddam Hussein. “The promise of America worked for my family,” she writes. “We’d left a country that was broken, unsafe, unpredictable and oppressing its own people for a country that allowed us to thrive.”A great virtue of her book is the moral outrage present on every page. “There are lots of villains in this story,” she says with refreshing bluntness, and she goes after many of them, from the (white) mayor of Flint to the public-health officials who claimed that ensuring safe drinking water was not their responsibility. Brad Wurfel, the spokesman for the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality during the crisis, who frequently reassured Flint’s citizens about their water’s safety — “Anyone who is concerned about lead in the drinking water in Flint can relax,” he said early on — gets particularly venomous treatment.For better or worse, there are no clear villains in “The Poisoned City,” by Anna Clark. A journalist based in Detroit, Clark takes a broader, more measured approach to the Flint crisis, keeping herself out of the story and aiming for what she has called “a collective narrative” of the local community. She is a smart, hard-working reporter who knows she has a great tale to tell, and if the narrative gets lost in bureaucratic minutiae at times (who knew that Genesee County had a drain commissioner?), it’s easy to forgive because you admire her passion and her sweat.Clark is particularly good at describing the importance of infrastructure in a functioning democracy: “Public water systems are one of this country’s most heroic accomplishments, a feat so successful that it is almost invisible.” In “The Poisoned City,” you will learn that the average water main in Flint is more than 80 years old; that the drinking-water supply system is made up of 15,000 lead service lines; that the only way to figure out where these lines are is to sort through a file box containing 45,000 index cards scrawled with notes in smudged pencil; and that, as a result of leaky old pipes laid when Flint was a much larger city, residents’ water bills averaged $149 a month, compared with $58 a month in neighboring Burton.Clark writes powerfully about the environmental consequences of a shrinking city, about how Flint’s financial decline drove the decision to switch drinking-water sources. She also discusses an outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease, related to the water crisis, that led to 12 deaths. But she’s most effective describing the racism that shaped Flint, especially under the influence of General Motors. In the 1920s, G.M. built thousands of houses for workers, but these could not “be leased to or occupied by any person or persons not wholly of the white or Caucasian race.” As Clark points out, “the apartheid approach to city building wasn’t just tolerated by the federal government; it was exacerbated by it.” Black neighborhoods were redlined for federal mortgages, cutting off their residents from home loans and a path to middle-class prosperity. Of the nearly 6,000 houses built in Flint in the early 1950s, fewer than 100 were open to African-Americans. City officials performed in blackface in minstrel shows, and black children were allowed in the local pool only on Wednesdays. Is it any surprise that more than 50 years later, when black kids were being poisoned by the city’s drinking water, nobody took action?In the end, many of the officials involved in the Flint crisis were fired or indicted on criminal charges ranging from obstructing an investigation to involuntary manslaughter. But there are no whistle-blowers in Clark’s book, no single bureaucrat who decided to poison the children of the city in order to save a few bucks in the budget. In a way, that’s her point. As she writes, “Neglect, it turns out, is not a passive force in American cities, but an aggressive one.”For Hanna-Attisha, the story of Flint is about the loss of the American dream, and the importance of community bonds and family life. “The most important medication I can prescribe is hope,” she writes, sounding a bit too much as if she’s auditioning for “The Oprah Winfrey Show.” But perhaps the best way to read these two worthy books is as a preview of America’s future. Many of the factors that led to tragedy in Flint — the disregard for environmental law, the unwillingness to invest in rotting infrastructure, the distrust of science, the lying officials and, above all, the racism that still shapes many state and federal policies — are the guiding principles of the Trump administration. The sad truth is that we are all living in versions of Flint now.Jeff Goodell is a contributing editor for Rolling Stone and the author of “The Water Will Come.”Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.OpinionMona Hanna-AttishaAdvertisement