https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/17/dining/malbec-mendoza-wine.html
To Move Beyond Malbec, Look Below the Surface - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1948
AdvertisementSupported byThe Pour9 PhotosView Slide Show ›By Eric AsimovTUNUYÁN, Argentina — The view from Bodega Catena Zapata’s Adrianna Vineyard, almost 5,000 feet high in the Uco Valley south of Mendoza, is nothing short of magnificent.The snow-frosted Andes command the western sky, looming above the vineyard like a prone Gulliver clad in white before a valley of Lilliputians. A current of wind flows ceaselessly off the mountains, rustling the leaves of the grapevines like a gurgling river.With difficulty, I turned my gaze down into a calicata, a test pit dug into the earth between rows of chardonnay vines. It revealed layers of pale beige limestone soil interspersed with large, smooth white rocks. Nearby was another pit, but the soil in it was completely different: chalky limestone infused with nothing larger than pebbles. Across the row was yet another pit, with no limestone, just loamy loess.Wines produced from each of these soils are just as different. Catena’s 2012 White Bones chardonnay, from the chalky soil, is dry and citrusy, with aromas and flavors of minerals and herbs. A 2012 White Stones chardonnay, from the rockier soil, is higher toned and more herbal, with tangy, succulent flavors and more intense minerality. And the grapes from the loamier soils go into Catena Alta chardonnay, which has fine acidity but is fruitier and less mineral.Among wine drinkers, Argentina is known above all for malbec. This friendly red, most often in a rich style dominated by flavors of jammy fruit and oak, has become almost a generic brand, the red wine equivalent of pinot grigio. In bars and restaurants all over the United States, consumers seeking an anonymous red wine ask for a glass of malbec.But a significant segment of the wine-drinking population has no use for malbec and, by extension, for Argentina.These are consumers on the leading edge, who have prompted new interest in wines of finesse and harmony. They have spearheaded re-examinations of grapes once considered too obscure and regions that had been roundly dismissed. They prize wines that express terroir. For them, Argentine malbec may just as well be Australian shiraz.Yet just as Australia has been stereotyped, perhaps unfairly, as a source of only heavy, fruity wines, so has Argentina been typed by the popular style of malbec. Though most of the wine from the Mendoza region, the center of Argentine malbec production, continues to be made in this fruity style, a growing number of producers are trying to move beyond the jam to make wines that explore the nuances of Mendoza terroir.Some are looking to make better, finer malbec. Others are looking to different grapes like chenin blanc, cabernet franc, pinot noir and chardonnay. Some producers, like Catena Zapata, are doing both.And so all over Mendoza, as I discovered on a trip here in December, vineyards are dotted with these calicatas, soil pits dug partly to educate visitors, perhaps, but also to educate the winemakers themselves, who for so long cared more about ease of farming and quantity of production than the quality of the wines or the particularity of terroirs. It’s easy to imagine Cistercian monks doing something similar as they cataloged the terroirs of Burgundy 500 years ago.The process has been a challenge because the soils of Mendoza are incredibly complicated. In the Adrianna Vineyard, and in many other places, the soils change radically from one row of vines to the next, sometimes over a matter of meters.The geology of Mendoza was shaped eons ago, when an ancient ocean covered the territory from Patagonia to Peru, leaving behind rich deposits of limestone. Over countless millenniums, rivers from the Andes deposited rocks and silt, leaving deep clay soils, stones and gravel in many varying combinations.“You still have pure limestone in the Andes, and slender veins extend into Mendoza,” said Pedro Parra, a geologist from Chile who specializes in terroir and is a partner in Altos Las Hormigas, a Mendoza producer intent on making terroir-expressive wines. “You can have pure limestone in one spot, but a few meters to the left, none.”For Mr. Parra and his colleagues, limestone is the holy grail, the fount from which the prize quality of minerality flows. He has relentlessly sought it out in Mendoza, digging pits, analyzing soil samples, correlating his discoveries with what he tastes in the wines.The differences can be astonishing. Pulenta Estate, an excellent producer in Luján de Cuyo, the region just outside the city of Mendoza where a good many wineries are, has a vineyard primarily of sand, gravel and clay. It also has a vineyard in the Uco Valley to the south with rocky limestone deposits.The malbec from the vineyard in Luján de Cuyo is pleasantly fruity and velvety soft. The malbec from the Uco Valley is structured and tannic, with fruit threaded through with aromas and flavors of graphite. Pulenta blends the two to make its estate malbec, but I prefer the Uco Valley solo.Indeed, the malbecs I tasted from Mendoza from clay soils, especially if the clay was highly irrigated and fertilized, were dark, sweet, fruity and high in alcohol. They were sadly familiar. Those from rockier soils, often with some limestone, tended to be more structured, precise and nuanced.Mr. Parra takes a Manichaean view of terroir.“It’s a fight between rocks and clay,” he said, standing in a soil pit in an Uco Valley vineyard between the towns of La Consulta and Eugenio Bustos. “Clay equals monster wines. Rocks equal vertical, structured wines. You either like clay-style wines or limestone-style wines.”For Catena Zapata, it’s never been that simple. Nicolás Catena, who took over the family winery in the 1960s, pioneered the movement toward higher-altitude vineyards in the 1980s and 1990s after he became convinced that his wines could achieve grace and finesse only if made in cooler climates than the family’s warmer lower-elevation vineyards nearer to the city of Mendoza. Only after planting the Adrianna Vineyard, the highest of Catena Zapata’s vineyards in the Uco Valley, did the winery begin to analyze the complexity of its soils.In 1995, Mr. Catena’s daughter Laura Catena created the Catena Institute, a research and development arm, which pays special attention to Adrianna. Ms. Catena, who is now the general director of Catena Zapata, believes that the soils are only part of the formula for making graceful, nuanced wine, along with the cool, dry, fresh climate at high altitude and the quality of the light.“We need both elements to make wines such as those from Adrianna: cool climate and special soils,” she said.As crucial as terroir may be, the best producers are taking steps to make sure it shines through. Many Mendoza producers still rely far too much on new oak barrels to impart flavor and structure to their wines, but producers like Catena Zapata, Altos Las Hormigas, Pulenta and Mendel have made a conscious effort to rein in the use of oak.Catena Zapata’s two high-end Adrianna Vineyard chardonnays are excellent examples: pristine, nuanced wines. The winery also makes a fresh, floral, beautifully balanced Adrianna malbec with the curious name Mundus Bacillus Terrae, after a type of mold found only in certain parts of the vineyard.Pulenta Estate, whose winemaker, Javier Lo Forte, said he was aiming to make wines of “complexity, finesse and drinkability,” makes a terrific, spicy, peppery cabernet franc that fulfills each goal. Pulenta also makes a fresh, tart sauvignon blanc, a savory chardonnay and a deep, structured Gran Malbec.The malbecs of Altos Las Hormigas, from a range of different vineyards, have become progressively less oaky, more refined and mineral-flavored since 2011.Mendel, in Luján de Cuyo alongside an 80-year-old malbec and cabernet vineyard, additionally farms an old vineyard in the Uco Valley, Finca Remota, from which it makes a deep, textured, mineral sémillon. It also produces a fine, balanced malbec; a structured, mineral cabernet sauvignon; and Unus, a blend of cabernet, malbec and petit verdot that is formidably concentrated and tannic. None of the wines are oaky.In restaurants in Mendoza and Buenos Aires, I found other producers aiming for more balanced wines, producers whom I will keep an eye out for in New York. Among the wines were a crisp, inviting chenin blanc from Gen del Alma, a light yet nuanced Eggo cabernet franc from Zorzal and another deliciously drinkable cabernet franc from Micheliniwine.Perhaps not coincidentally, each of these wines was from the Michelinis, three brothers who in various combinations are making wines that would be embraced in the hippest natural wine bars of New York.The Micheliniwine cabernet franc comes from the Tupungato Winelands, an unusual project in the Uco Valley that combines high-end residences in a country-club atmosphere with golf, polo (an Argentine obsession) and private vineyards.Driving through the vineyard area, Mr. Parra, the geologist, pointed out that the flat areas in the wine lands, mostly clay and alluvial soils, were well planted with vines, but that the steep slopes, made up of rocky, sandy limestone, were bare.“The tradition is planting on the flats, but the grand cru is on these gorgeous slopes, which are completely unplanted,” he lamented. “Maybe that will be the future, Argentina 2020.”Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.Advertisement