https://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/14/theater/reviews/curious-incident-of-the-dog-in-the-night-time-in-london.html
‘Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time’ in London - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1755
AdvertisementSupported byTheater ReviewBy Ben BrantleyLONDON — You need blinkers to navigate a big city, something to screen out the teeming surplus of ambient sights and sounds. Christopher Boone — the 15-year-old hero of the thrillingly staged adaptation of “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time” at the Apollo Theater — has no such apparatus at all. And on his first day in London, it’s a lack that threatens to pulverize him.Us too. As directed by Marianne Elliott, working with an inspired set of designers, Christopher’s maiden voyage into an alien metropolis becomes a virtuoso study in sensory overload. Those lights, noises, street signs, road maps, random words that spell themselves into being, and, oh yes, that moving staircase that materializes out of nowhere: it all keeps coming at you, to the point that you expect your mind to give up and shut down.It doesn’t of course. Nor does Christopher’s, though the drenched, rigid form of Luke Treadaway, the sensitive actor playing him, shows how much the experience has drained him. You’ll find your own muscles tightening in sympathy, and you may feel a need to check your pulse.How could it be otherwise? Christopher, who suffers from a disorder that would appear to be Asperger’s syndrome, finds it hard enough to process the events of an afternoon at home in the town of Swindon. He’d be better off in outer space, which would at least be quiet, than in London.The extraordinary accomplishment of “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time,” which opened in the West End on Tuesday night after a hot-ticket run at the National Theater last year, is that it forces you to look at the world through Christopher’s order-seeking eyes. In doing so you’re likely to reconsider the dauntless battle your own mind is always waging against the onslaught of stimuli that is life. Scary, isn’t it? Exhilarating too. Adapted by Simon Stephens from Mark Haddon’s best-selling novel of 2003, “Dog” turns daily existence into a perilous trek into the unknown, which of course it is. The difference is that Christopher sees this with an acuity that hurts, and we’re allowed to feel his pain. Strange to think that this vicarious exercise in disorientation may be the most entertaining family drama since the stage version of “War Horse” galloped into international renown several years ago.“Dog” shares part of the pedigree of “War Horse,” the story of a boy and his horse during World War I, which was also first staged at the National Theater under the direction of Ms. Elliott (and Tom Morris), with Mr. Treadaway as the leading lad. The principal flaws of “Dog” are also like those of “War Horse.” Both shows are too long in the telling, and their sentimentality can on occasion slide into cuteness or, worse, condescension.But “Dog” is also like “War Horse” in its ability to create a theatrical world that somehow feels more lifelike than life itself. In “War Horse” it was the title character and his equine peers, giant puppets summoned into being before our eyes, that were the source of that magical transformation.Here it’s the inspired visuals that give pulsing form to the way one person thinks. The designer Bunny Christie has created a black graph-paper box of a set that suggests provisional order imposed on infinite darkness. Objects and clothes glow in the sort of neon-bright hues that fashion editors keep vainly trying to push upon their readers but which have a very serious reason to be in this production.The colors are part of a crucial code by which Christopher identifies familiar images and helps keep at bay the roiling strangeness of what lies beyond. A whiz at the abstractions of mathematics, Christopher has what he calls (in Mr. Haddon’s book) “Behavioral Problems.” These are triggered whenever anyone or anything disrupts his tidy interior universe by touching him, perhaps, or speaking in metaphors. That’s when his world heaves and mutates, a process summoned by a technical team that includes Paule Constable (lighting), Finn Ross (video) and Ian Dickinson (sound). These artists — along with the movement directors Scott Graham and Steven Hoggett — help create the sensory equivalent of the first-person narration of Mr. Haddon’s novel, in which Christopher sets out to solve several mysteries. These include what really happened to a dog found murdered in his neighborhood and the disappearance of his mother (a very good Holly Aird), whom his father (Sean Gleeson, first rate) tells him died two years before the play begins.To the credit of Mr. Stephens, a probing and original dramatist (“Harper Regan,” “Port”), the plot is never less than clear, no matter what detours it takes. The ensemble, as a whole, is scary and exaggerated in just the right ways in embodying the challenges posed by the existence of others. The problem for me comes in having Siobhan (Niamh Cusack), Christopher’s special education teacher, recite the story he has written, presented as a school project.Ms. Cusack does this with a gushy, artificial sense of wonder that you associate with grown-ups talking to small children. Though the device of Siobhan as an interpreter is retired for much of the second act, she shows up again to step outside the show and suggest that this play is a work that Christopher has made by his very own self.Yuck. Perhaps the point here is that even the best-intentioned souls can be patronizing about the struggles of the mentally challenged. Or perhaps the show’s creators believed this tone of voice is necessary to appeal to the children in the audience. In any case it is likely to irritate anybody older than 8.Mr. Treadaway, on the other hand, inhabits his character without distancing preciousness. He gives a lyrical, intensely physical performance that finds the poetry in the ways Christopher both stretches out and shuts down. Since “Dog” was first published Mr. Haddon has said that he objects to the term “Asperger’s syndrome” in defining Christopher. He should be pleased that in this production his hero seems less like a case history than an extreme version of every one of us, doing our daily best to make sense of our own senses. “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time” is playing at the Apollo Theater, London; apollotheatrelondon.co.uk.Advertisement