https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/03/opinion/joe-biden-media.html
Opinion | The Joe Biden Media Frenzy - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
876
AdvertisementSupported byOnce again, journalists are giving in to their own worst instincts.By David GreenbergMr. Greenberg is a professor of history and of journalism and media studies at Rutgers.In May 1987, Senator Gary Hart of Colorado was drummed out of the Democratic presidential contest following reports alleging an affair with Donna Rice, a 29-year-old woman who was not his wife.Months later, Douglas Ginsburg, a federal judge whom President Ronald Reagan had nominated for the Supreme Court, admitted that he had smoked marijuana years before, including as a young law professor, scuttling his candidacy.The next summer, the Republican presidential nominee, George Bush, chose the little-known Indiana Senator Dan Quayle as his running mate, leading to a frantic investigation into how Mr. Quayle had gotten into the Indiana National Guard instead of serving in the Vietnam War. (Rumors, never proven, also swirled about affairs and pot use.) Mr. Quayle stayed on the ticket, but never quite recovered.The late 1980s and 1990s marked a high-water mark for a kind of giddy journalistic derangement over politicians’ adultery, drug use and draft avoidance — a somewhat arbitrary trio of offenses inflated into mortal sins. Candidates and nominees for various public positions were barraged with questions on these issues, although no one ever showed that they bore on a person’s fitness for office. These orgies of saturation press coverage, feverish speculation and moral righteousness were dubbed feeding frenzies.In time, the manias subsided. Bill Clinton was elected president as an admitted philanderer. Barack Obama confessed to having used “a little blow” in his youth and no one cared. Not one of our baby-boomer presidents served in Vietnam — a fact that troubles few people today.So are we now able to evaluate aspirants for high office dispassionately, on the basis of their experience, achievements and qualifications? It sure isn’t looking that way. More likely, we have just dropped one bucket of shark bait and picked up another.We are now witnessing a feeding frenzy over Joe Biden’s penchant for sometimes-unwelcome public displays of affection. Mr. Biden, who is famous for overly tactile friendliness, has been dealing with two women’s charges that he upset them by greeting them far too intimately. Pundits are now discussing whether these actions should end Mr. Biden’s (as yet unannounced) presidential candidacy and even declaring point blank that he is the wrong man to succeed President Trump.Charges about inappropriate touching must be heard and evaluated. But the more difficult question for journalists is whether these charges should become grounds for feeding frenzies — all-consuming, multi-day stories that, by virtue of their blanket coverage, signal to audiences that they outweigh everything else about a candidate. Front-page stories, 24/7 coverage and viral tweets can easily knock someone out of contention. Should they? How the press handles Mr. Biden’s penchant for handling others will test whether it has learned from its mistakes in the days of Hart and Ginsburg and Quayle.A historical lens may help us see things with a bit more dispassion. The media obsession with a specific set of gotcha issues, the conviction that they warrant an expenditure of vast journalistic resources, dates to the years after the Vietnam War and Watergate. Chastened by those national traumas, Americans, including journalists, concluded that they had sprung from the debauched or deformed characters of President Johnson and especially President Nixon. “Character” became the watchword in politics.But character was defined at once too vaguely and too narrowly. The imperative to evaluate character was too broad in that it gave journalists license to vet aspirants for the presidency (as well as for the Supreme Court, Cabinet appointments and other offices) by prying into their personal lives.Yet it was also too narrow, because the peculiar foibles that the press fixated on were hardly sufficient to adequately judge someone’s integrity or maturity or temperament. The issues of sex, drugs, and Vietnam loomed large for reporters of the Baby Boom generation because they provided an arena in which to work through unresolved feelings about the cultural transformations of the 1960s.Eventually, the maturation of Generation X — whose members were largely unfazed by tales of sex, pot and draft dodging — diminished the potential of the boomers’ pet issues to blossom into scandal. More broadly, the public was wearying of hyped-up controversies that, it was becoming clear, had little or no relevance to how a politician performed his or her job.Recently, though, America experienced another trauma. The election of Donald Trump — a rank misogynist and confessed sexual assaulter — over a woman seemingly destined to be America’s first female president jolted many voters. Among its other effects, Trump’s election helped spark the explosion of women’s activism we have seen since 2016, including the long-overdue insistence that we call sexual harassers and assaulters to account. If Mr. Trump couldn’t be stopped, others guilty of like offenses would be policed with new vigor.As many people recognize, however, for all the big shots, predators and cads rightly brought to justice, there have also been moments of excess — of sober judgment suspended. Most infamously, in late 2017, following multiple claims of inappropriate touching, the Senate peremptorily cast out Minnesota’s Al Franken, before an ethics investigation could even occur. Mr. Franken denied that his actions amounted to sexual harassment, and apologized for them anyway. But when two new stories were posted to the internet in early December, his senate colleague Kirsten Gillibrand led a parade of lawmakers who demanded he give up his seat.Like Gary Hart, Mr. Franken cannot blame others entirely, since he chose to step down. But a lot of Americans had and still have grave qualms about the lack of due process he was afforded. Clearly, both the media and the political class bore some responsibility for ratcheting up the pressure on him, instead of calling — as they could have — for cool deliberation to determine what actually happened, how severe his offenses were, and whether they should overshadow the many reasons his constituents might wish him to keep serving (as polls suggested they did).It is possible to cover stories such as these without creating feeding frenzies. Journalists can run fewer stories on a subject, talk about it once a day on cable news and not every hour, assume a matter-of-fact tone, remind themselves that Twitter isn’t public opinion, question scandal material shopped by someone’s political rivals, and in other ways bear in mind that many people deplore the media proclivity for these furors. When scandals relating to personal behavior arise, they can also ask themselves whether those behaviors reflect at all on how the politician might deal with Vladimir Putin, restore democracy to Venezuela, solve an immigration crisis or economic meltdown, or develop a plan for addressing health-care costs or planetary dangers. And thoughtful coverage can illuminate the immense differences between, for example, Mr. Biden’s occasionally cringe-worthy physicality and Mr. Trump’s contempt-filled view of women as veritable pieces of meat.Without such a tempered media environment, though, it is easy to imagine Mr. Biden or other candidates succumbing to media pressure as Mr. Franken did, without any careful weighing of the nature, severity and relevance of the alleged wrongdoing. Nonetheless, in our scandal-soaked past there have also been politicians who withstood a media battering only to find their courage rewarded with the news that the public supported them all along — and that the headlines and headline news did not reflect popular opinion.In 1989, for example, after disclosures that Massachusetts Representative Barney Frank had hired a male prostitute and kept the man on his payroll, many politicians, along with the Boston Globe, called on the congressman to resign. Mr. Frank resisted the pressure, submitted himself to the judgment of his constituents, and was reelected twelve more times.Bill Clinton, too, stoutly rejected the pundits’ calls during the Monica Lewinsky scandal that he abdicate, and he withstood impeachment by a Republican-controlled House of Representatives. His approval ratings soared as the drama dragged on, showing again that voters don’t always agree when a media mob calls for a politician’s head.More recently, Governor Ralph Northam of Virginia was found to have displayed a photo in his medical-school yearbook of a student in blackface beside another one in Klan robes. Despite a cascade of calls for his resignation, he instead vowed to redouble his commitment to racial justice — and, a short while later, it turned out that most African-Americans in the state wanted him to stay put.These politicians at some level appreciated that a feeding frenzy is typically not a mirror but a distortion of public opinion. Consciously or intuitively, most of us know that public morality is distinct from private morality — that a great president or Supreme Court justice can be a flawed or rotten person, and a noble soul might be a lousy senator or governor. (Of course, we can all think of a horrible human being who also made a terrible president.) We need to remember that when we grill candidates about the taboo du jour, we aren’t helping ourselves understand their suitability for leadership but rather working through other cultural concerns.As for character, the real test of it may be whether a politician has the fortitude and self-confidence to brave the media storm.David Greenberg is a professor of history and of journalism and media studies at Rutgers University and the author of “Republic of Spin: An Inside History of the American Presidency.”The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement