https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/13/opinion/college-admissions-bribery-ivy-league.html
Opinion | ‘Do Your Children a Favor: Develop Some Real Values’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2787
AdvertisementSupported byReaders respond to the college admissions scandal.By Rachel L. Harris and Lisa TarchakMs. Harris and Ms. Tarchak are senior editorial assistants.Gross class privilege, the repression of meritocracy and the hypocrisy of supporting affirmative action are just a few of the concerns raised by Opinion readers since Tuesday’s college admissions scandal broke. We received more than 4,000 comments on our coverage, which included Frank Bruni’s column, “Bribes to Get Into Yale and Stanford? What Else Is New?,” the Editorial, “Turns Out There’s a Proper Way to Buy Your Kid a College Spot” and “I Learned in College That Admission Has Always Been for Sale,” an essay by Rainesford Stauffer, a writer and recent college graduate. A selection of those comments, edited for clarity and length, is below.Private institutions like Stanford have the right to shape their student bodies based on their own values. No one has a right to a Stanford education. That some have a leg up on elite college admissions because they can afford a tutor doesn’t bother me at all. Rich people also have a leg up on buying Porsches and fancy houses; on paying tuition at elite private high schools. So what? The real scandal is the defunding of state universities. As a society, we should be more concerned with providing a solid, affordable undergraduate education to every willing student. — James Grosser, Washington, D.C.So much raw greed on display. Such anxious, seething lust for status, position, privilege, and money. Frankly, it’s disgusting. I’ve been reading all these columns for days now, watching news coverage, and so far not one word about students wanting to learn or about what education might mean to them, apart from being a kind of weapon with which to scratch and claw over others while climbing some grand pyramid of power and acquisitiveness. Life is more than all that; learning is more than all that. Do your children a favor. Develop some real values. — R.R.I., Ocean Beach, Calif.Gone are the lofty days when education was meant to make us a better citizens. Now it’s simply another gate for a young person who can barely balance a checkbook to pass through for the chance of not being as unequal in income as their peers. It’s all about pedigree, not substance. As a millennial, I see what a fool I was for obtaining multiple degrees that got me nowhere, except in debt. — Anne, New JerseyWealth makes things more attainable. That’s why we seek it. The question is, what goods and services should be beyond the reach of wealth? Of course there are inequities in life. Arguably, our system has let them grow out of control. But that doesn’t mean the parent who pays for an S.A.T. prep course is the moral equivalent of one who pays someone to change their child’s score. — Charlie B., U.S.A.When I first heard about this story, I really did wonder what was actually criminal about this very bad behavior. Families have been gaming the system forever to get their children into top schools. How is bribing a coach all that different from writing your child’s essay? It’s just a heavier thumb on the scale. — Marcia Goodrich, MichiganThe children of the wealthy and privileged have always been given special consideration at selective colleges. It’s affirmative action for the aristocracy, although it’s never referred to or criticized as a betrayal of the meritocratic ideal. But set aside even a few spots for members of minorities who have historically been the victims of discrimination, and suddenly it is important not to compromise academia’s strict meritocratic standards. The hypocrisy is breathtaking. — lydgate, VirginiaThe thing about having a stack of dollar bills is that if some get dirty, you can just clean them off with the rest. This scandal will no doubt outrage the mere upper-middle class parents, who can only afford the $100 per hour tutors and will, no doubt, feel particularly victimized that their own efforts to game the system have just been outdone by the class they aspire to join. — Josh, SeattleBe outraged. Hold our institutions to a higher standard. Hold the fraudsters accountable. It’s a good thing that these acts are being prosecuted and denounced. I don’t want people with pedigrees not earned operating on me, engineering my bridges and buildings, operating my financial system or running my country. Complacency is killing us, cut by cut. The elite and privileged might always exist but we can still demand a meritocracy rather than slinking away quietly and accepting it with our tails between our legs. — sebb, WashingtonThis kind of cheating contributes to the creation of a permanent economic underclass. Right or wrong, degrees from the elite schools mean something when young people start to look for work. They provide tremendous access and opportunities that less competitive schools can’t offer. That’s why these crimes are serious. Because of these cheaters, deserving working class and middle class children are denied an opportunity for a better life than their parents had. — Orion Clemens, Florida, Mo.The problem is that these people, who have been given every leg up that their parents, their wealth and their connections have afforded, often believe that they are a product of their own intelligence and hard work. Then they tend to have less understanding and compassion for those who started in this world with far less and support policies that continue to hold back the poor, the under served and those who have truly started out in this world with the deck stacked against them. — J.B. Hart, CharlotteI was a student at a very good university in the Midwest where I met a guy who told me he was he was only there because of his legacy status (his father had gone to the school). He seemed to feel that he had let his father down and was afraid he looked stupid to his classmates. Our children are not trophies for us to show around. They need to find the right niches for themselves and parents should help them do that. — scrim1, Bowie, Md.The real losers in all this are the children of these wealthy parents, who learn that cheating is the way to win in life. They have been failed by their parents and lost something precious: their self-respect. Their entire life, people will wonder if what they achieve is a product of honest work and skill or another cheat — even if they end up being presidents or senior White House advisers. — Jim Brokaw, CaliforniaThe Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement