http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/24/world/australia/dictionary-new-slang-words.html
An Australian Dictionary Makes ‘Shirt-front’ and ‘Budgie Smuggler’ Official - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2286
AdvertisementSupported byBy Mike IvesHONG KONG — In October 2014, Australia’s prime minister produced blank stares around the globe when he vowed to “shirt-front” President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia over the downing of a Malaysia Airlines plane in Ukraine, in which 28 Australian citizens had been killed.Back home, many Australians knew exactly what Tony Abbott, who was then prime minister, was talking about: “Shirt-front” describes charging an opponent in Australian football. But those who didn’t understand had few authoritative sources to consult.Until now.“Shirt-front” is among the more than 6,000 new entries in an updated version of the Australian National Dictionary, released Tuesday at a ceremony at the country’s Parliament in Canberra, the capital. It was the first update since the dictionary’s inaugural edition was printed in 1988.The new edition, which lists 16,000 idioms, was compiled by the Australian National Dictionary Center at the Australian National University. New entries include popular terms like bogan (“an uncultured and unsophisticated person”) and budgie smugglers (“a pair of closefitting male swimming briefs made of stretch fabric”).The dictionary also includes terms from more than 100 indigenous languages that have been incorporated into Australian English in recent decades. For example, rakali, a word for water rat, is commonly used outside of indigenous communities.The Australian National Dictionary, a standard guide to the Australian vernacular, added 6,000 words and phrases on Tuesday, its first update since 1988. Test your knowledge of the new terms with this quiz.The dictionary, published by Oxford University Press Australia and New Zealand, is not the only Australian-centric one in print. But Amanda Laugesen, its managing editor, said it was unique because it paid particular attention to how words and phrases had evolved.Some of the additions to the new edition are obsolete in everyday speech but were included for their cultural value, she said by telephone on Tuesday.“It’s more a kind of history, if you like, of the language,” Dr. Laugesen said of the dictionary.Initial reactions on social media were a mix of amusement, surprise and indignation.Some users expressed gratitude that the dictionary’s debut had brought new attention to famous “budgie smuggler” photographs of Mr. Abbott in a tightfitting bathing suit.Others grumbled about the dictionary’s selection of words, or the timing of its release, with one saying that it was “outrageous that it took until 2016” for the word bogan to be included.Here’s a chance to test your knowledge of Australian idioms.Follow Mike Ives on Twitter @mikeives. Advertisement