https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/23/nyregion/f-train-express-plan-brings-anger-and-joy-depending-on-the-neighborhood.html
F Train Express Plan Brings Anger and Joy, Depending on the Neighborhood - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
285
AdvertisementSupported byBy Emma G. FitzsimmonsA proposal to bring the F express train back to Brooklyn after nearly three decades set off a storm of debate last week, dividing the borough into commuting winners and losers.On one side, brownstone Brooklyn rejected the prospect of fewer trains at stations in the Park Slope and Carroll Gardens neighborhoods. On the other, the more working-class neighborhoods of Borough Park and Kensington in southern Brooklyn cheered the possibility of faster service to Manhattan.With the reliability of subway routines hanging in the balance, much of the borough was abuzz over the news, and two members of the City Council clashed over whether the plan was fair.Brad Lander, a councilman who represents Park Slope, called the plan “atrocious,” saying he felt blindsided by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.“They’re proposing to hurt people at the most crowded, fastest-growing stations,” Mr. Lander, a Democrat, said. “It’s utterly irrational.”Councilman David G. Greenfield, a Democrat whose district includes Borough Park, argued that residents in southern Brooklyn needed easier access to jobs and that the inconvenience for those who used local stops was relatively minor.“They should really be a little more neighborly,” Mr. Greenfield said.Under the authority’s plan, some F trains would run express at morning and evening rush hours from Church Avenue in Kensington to Jay Street-MetroTech in Downtown Brooklyn, stopping only at Seventh Avenue in Park Slope. Starting in the fall of 2017, about half as many F trains would stop at local stations including Fourth Avenue and Bergen Street.The F train is notorious for uneven service, though it does have one of the best views in the system. As the tracks rise high over the Gowanus Canal, riders are met with sweeping views of the city and a glimpse of the Statue of Liberty.Riders said the letter F suits the line, which runs from Coney Island in Brooklyn through Manhattan to Jamaica in Queens. It stands for its failing grade, or for the frustration riders feel. Only about 58 percent of weekday trains complete the route on time, according to recent statistics from the authority, making it one of the worst lines for delays.At a time when the subway system is severely overcrowded and straining to improve service, every schedule tweak is intimately felt, and one rider’s gain is inevitably viewed as another’s loss. At the same time, outlying neighborhoods are increasingly the most affordable places to live. But the commutes can be grueling. On a Monday morning, a trip from Coney Island to Herald Square in Manhattan takes about 55 minutes — if the trains are running on time.The express service — an earlier version of which ended in 1987 when the route received major repairs — would save its riders nearly three and a half minutes on average during their morning commute, and some riders would shave off as much as seven minutes, the authority found. Local riders would lose more than a minute on average each morning.Bringing the express back has been discussed on and off for some time, and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, a political independent, pushed for express trains during his 2009 re-election bid.In a new report, the authority recommended moving forward with the express service, arguing it would benefit riders in southern Brooklyn with the longest commutes. But the change would require approval from the authority’s board, and the heated conversation over the proposal is likely to continue.“This is just the start of the process, in which we will actively engage all of the communities that are affected,” Kevin Ortiz, a spokesman for the authority, said.Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, was a longtime Park Slope resident, and the F train is the closest subway line to his home there, though he tends to travel by car. His office declined to say where the mayor stood on the proposal.For F express service to work, Mr. Lander said, the authority would have to add more trains on the line — something it says it cannot do.While brownstone Brooklyn is a more affluent area, Mr. Lander noted that express trains would also skip stops used by public-housing residents in Red Hook and other neighborhoods. The closest station to Red Hook is Smith-Ninth Street, a local stop under the plan and a long walk for many who live in the waterfront area and also rely on buses.At the Ditmas Avenue stop in Kensington, riders loved the idea of an express train. Nancy LeBron, who works at a health care company in Manhattan and has taken the F train for more than 20 years, described its pace as “totally molasses.” Express service, she said, would be a huge relief.“I’d probably get to work on time,” Ms. LeBron said.Chaim Pollack, 27, who works in information technology in Manhattan, had another idea.“I would sleep an extra 10 or 15 minutes!” he said.At the Carroll Gardens station, riders complained of cramped conditions that would grow worse under the plan.“If there are ever delays with the trains, the platform gets very crowded,” said Angela O’Connor, 40, who works for a labor union. “If you take away every other train, we’re going to feel it in the morning.”Stephanie Carter, 39, who works in the television industry, had the same concern.“I’m more than happy for their commute to be faster, but I don’t think it should come at the expense of others,” she said.But some riders supported the plan, even if it inconvenienced them. Rebecca Horne, 45, said her neighbors in Carroll Gardens would adapt.“It probably is more important,” she said, “for people who live farther out to be able to get in.”Nate Schweber contributed reporting.Advertisement