https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/28/dining/steakhouse-nyc-restaurant-openings.html
Putting Fresh Spins on the Steakhouse - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
630
AdvertisementSupported byBy Florence FabricantReinventing the steakhouse — the standard leather-bound, mahogany-paneled, cabernet-soaked model — has become a New York preoccupation in recent years. This season’s entries play a number of new variations on the theme.A Greek steakhouse in the Flatiron district, Merakia, nods to history. Greek cattle rustlers in Ottoman-occupied regions in the late 19th century would cook their swag over spits; hence the emphasis here on rotisserie cooking, and not just for beef. Greek appetizers, dips and side dishes will fill out the menu by the chef Tassos Ballas.Highly anticipated restaurant openings, and an industry in transformation.Partisans of Turkish cuisine will have theirs, too, at Nusr-Et Steakhouse, the first New York restaurant from Nusret Gokce, a celebrity chef better known as Salt Bae, for the dramatic way he salts the meat before grilling. A branch of Mr. Gokce’s flagship in Istanbul, the enormous blocklong space in the former China Grill in Midtown, designed by Glen & Co., will have an open kitchen and reveal the original bronzed walls.Call it a gimmick, but SaltBrick Tavern in Downtown Brooklyn will also feature salt, in slabs of the pink Himalayan variety that line the Connecticut room it uses for aging the beef. The company, Craveable Hospitality Group, has patented a process that it says adds flavor and tenderness. The menu will offer a somewhat limited list of steaks, plus a bone-in pork schnitzel and a lamb sirloin. (Glen & Co. is designing the interior of this one, too.)Butcher & Banker will mark the return of the chef Scott Campbell, who has been quietly working on this project for several years. The restaurant and lounge, in the former Manufacturers Hanover Trust bank vault under the New Yorker Hotel, will put a new spin on the steak menu, with a long list of vegetable sides, choices like culotte and rib cap steaks, and a number of cuts, not just beef, on the bone. At Holy Ground in TriBeCa, smoked briskets and pork butts will be served tableside, along with prime strip loins and rib-eyes. It’s from the restaurateur Matt Abramcyk and his partners.Steakhouses are a rarity in Harlem, where the Cecil, which closed this summer, will be resurrected as the Cecil Steakhouse. The new owners, the chef Raphael Benavides and Anahi Angelone, who also own Minton’s Playhouse (with Richard D. Parsons) and Corner Social, said they sensed a gap in the neighborhood. Mr. Benavides is from Argentina, so expect some South American flavors to complement traditional cuts of beef.Late fall will bring a third branch of Michael Stillman’s Quality Eats, where lesser cuts of steak are given their due. And Ikinari Steak, the Japanese quick-serve steak chain where many diners eat standing up and lines stretch out the door, is adding six locations in Chelsea and Midtown.Butcher & Banker New Yorker Hotel, 481 Eighth Avenue (West 34th Street), September.The Cecil Steakhouse 210 West 118th Street (St. Nicholas Avenue), September.Holy Ground 109 West Broadway (Reade Street), October.Ikinari Steak 96 Eighth Avenue (West 15th Street), 154 Seventh Avenue (West 19th Street), 368 West 46th Street (Ninth Avenue), 37 West 46th Street (between Fifth and Sixth Avenues), 243 West 54th Street (between Broadway and Eighth Avenue), 455 Park Avenue (East 57th Street), starting in October.Merakia 5 West 21st Street (Fifth Avenue), September.Nusr-Et Steakhouse 60 West 53rd Street (Sixth Avenue), November.Quality Eats 3 East 28th Street (Fifth Avenue), late fall.SaltBrick Tavern 156 Tillary Street (Flatbush Avenue), Downtown Brooklyn, September.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.An earlier version of a picture caption with this article misspelled the surname of SaltBrick Tavern’s executive pastry chef. She is Tracy Wilk, not Will.Advertisement