https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/07/magazine/the-rage-and-tenderness-of-david-wojnarowiczs-art.html
The Rage and Tenderness of David Wojnarowicz’s Art - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1199
FeatureAt a retrospective at the Whitney Museum, the life and work of the artist and AIDS activist are a model for making art out of political anger.Peter Hujar, “David Wojnarowicz With Hand Touching Eye,” 1981.CreditCreditThe Peter Hujar Archive LLC; the Museum of Modern Art, New York.Supported byBy Christine SmallwoodIf you know one work by David Wojnarowicz, it is probably “One Day This Kid,” a black-and-white self-portrait of the artist as a prepubescent, surrounded by text. This kid is wearing suspenders and a gee-whiz face, all forehead and chin and two buck teeth. His ears stick out like satellite dishes. It’s the early ’60s, and Wojnarowicz looks as if he walked into the Sears photo studio directly from the set of “Leave it to Beaver.” Then you read the words.One day this kid will get larger. … One day this kid will feel something stir. … One day this kid will do something that causes men who wear the uniforms of priests and rabbis, men who inhabit certain stone buildings, to call for his death. One day politicians will enact legislation against this kid. … He will be subject to loss of home, civil rights, jobs and all conceivable freedoms. All this will begin to happen in one or two years when he discovers he desires to place his naked body on the naked body of another boy.Wojnarowicz designed “One Day This Kid” for a catalog accompanying his 1990 retrospective, “Tongues of Flame.” (The catalog’s designer, Jean Foos, worked on it with him.) Twenty-five years on, it remains a powerful statement about innocence, shame, hate, homophobia and the dangers posed to individual liberty by repressive governments. Like many of Wojnarowicz’s works, it mixes text and image, autobiography and political action, tenderness and rage. And as much as it says, it is more remarkable for what it doesn’t say. Wojnarowicz had received a diagnosis of AIDS before he made “One Day This Kid” (he died in 1992, at age 37), but the text makes no mention of the virus. It diagnoses a society, not an individual. If AIDS kills you, it says without saying, that’s only because America already wants you dead.“One Day This Kid” is currently on display at the Whitney Museum in New York, toward the end of a large and impressive new retrospective devoted to Wojnarowicz. It’s the first opportunity in decades for people to see Wojnarowicz’s work in its polymathic totality: photography, spray-painted garbage-can lids, stencils, photocollages, sculptures, music, films and large collage paintings of tanks, brains and gunslingers, hung as grandly as anything at the Louvre. There was another Wojnarowicz-related exhibition on view this summer — “Soon All This Will Be Picturesque Ruins,” a restaging of his installations at P.P.O.W. Gallery in Chelsea — and “The Unflinching Eye,” a selection from his archives at New York University, is up until the end of September. “Weight of the Earth,” an edited selection of his tape journals, has also been recently published. Cultural journalists like to speak about artists “having a moment,” and if this is Wojnarowicz’s moment, it has come at a good time for us. “We need to activate people,” said Wendy Olsoff, a founder of P.P.O.W. “That’s always been David’s role.”The political climate of 2018 is at once totally activated and completely enervated. Wojnarowicz always looked outward and never retreated into the comfort of private life. Even before the AIDS crisis, he spoke, all the time, to and about the forgotten men and women of Ronald Reagan’s America. He was one of them: an abused child and former hustler who cruised the dilapidated and dangerous West Side piers, comfortable in situations or places that were unknown, that could turn suddenly violent or sweet, that were new. Many nights he spent with drifters, users, hustlers and lowlifes, collecting their memories and tall tales in “monologues” that became his first published book, “The Waterfront Journals.” “I had a lot of great sex in prison. …” “There ain’t hoboes like there used to be. …” “I learned to tap in the Savoy Ballroom up in Harlem in 1956. …” “Hey, did I ever tell you about the time I got beat up when I was 12 or 13 years old?” It was all part of his unceasing effort to bring lives and desires that were discarded or deemed less-than into public view. He is an ever-present example, in the words of the artist Alex Da Corte, of what it means “to seek out the punk and radical and use your body, your voice and your Xerox machine as a tool to bring about change.”With change comes controversy. Just before he made “One Day This Kid,” Wojnarowicz wrote an essay, “Postcards From America: X-Rays From Hell,” for a catalog accompanying an exhibition about AIDS art curated by Nan Goldin at Artists Space. The National Endowment for the Arts, which provided a third of the show’s budget, was not impressed. It had already taken issue with Andres Serrano’s “Piss Christ” and Robert Mapplethorpe’s bullwhip, and it didn’t like how Wojnarowicz described Cardinal John O’Connor, a powerful Catholic cleric who lobbied against teaching about AIDS and safe sex in New York City schools — as “this fat cannibal from the house of walking swastikas up on Fifth Avenue.” Wojnarowicz consented to remove a four-letter word from his characterization of O’Connor, but as for the rest, he said, and I’m paraphrasing here, over my dead body — our dead bodies. The ones that died because you thought condoms were a sin.Everyone compares it to a war. The ones left behind had too many to mourn. Research was slow, disorganized and underfunded. Women were excluded from drug trials. Infants were given placebos. In Texas, a local politician said that one way to solve the AIDS crisis was to “shoot the queers.” But Wojnarowicz wasn’t just angry; he was tired. “It is exhausting,” he once wrote, “living in a population where people don’t speak up if what they witness doesn’t directly threaten them.” He battled fatigue, rousing himself and others from the numbness of constant grief. This section of “Postcards From America” escaped the notice of the N.E.A., but it was more incendiary than whatever insults he had to fling at the Roman Catholic Church:I worry that friends will slowly become professional pallbearers, waiting for each death, of their lovers, friends and neighbors, and polishing their funeral speeches; perfecting their rituals of death rather than a relatively simple ritual of life such as screaming in the streets. … I imagine what it would be like if, each time a lover, friend or stranger died of this disease, their friends, lovers or neighbors would take the dead body and drive with it in a car a hundred miles an hour to Washington, D.C., and blast through the gates of the White House and come to a screeching halt before the entrance and dump their lifeless form on the front steps. It would be comforting to see those friends, neighbors, lovers and strangers mark time and place and history in such a public way.Wojnarowicz always had anger in him. In his 20s, he and his friend Willy, whom he met at a halfway house, would walk the streets, smashing every telephone booth, or so he claimed, between Midtown and South Street Seaport. He once told an interviewer that if he hadn’t found the “communication outlet” of writing and art, he would have been “on the top of a water tower” years earlier, ”with my rifle.” But over his life as an artist, Wojnarowicz learned to direct this anger like a controlled burn. The result was something unexpected: comfort. Anger, he learned, could comfort only when it was made public, when it expressed shared values, when it asserted dignity, when it made life on the margins more visible. Instead of giving in to political exhaustion, Wojnarowicz fanned his rage and channeled it into a message of — not hope, exactly, but insistence. I am here. Dead or alive, this kid would be seen.It was not easy for Wojnarowicz to make a place for himself in the world. He had a childhood that Fran Lebowitz described as “a classic background for a serial killer.” He and his siblings were beaten and abused by their father, an alcoholic who, Wojnarowicz said, once served them their pet rabbit for dinner. Later the children moved to their mother’s apartment in Manhattan, where they were neglected and generally mistreated. As a teenager, Wojnarowicz hustled in Times Square while attending, sporadically, the High School for Music and Art. It was a dangerous life — he was raped and once fled a psycho with a knife — but it was also dangerous just to be gay. You could be beaten or worse for (supposedly) looking at someone wrong.He hopped trains and traveled to the West Coast, and in New York hung out in the poetry scene. On a trip to Paris to visit his sister, he saw life-size photographs of Arthur Rimbaud, already one of his heroes, wheat-pasted around the city. When he came home to New York, he began posing his friends and lovers in a Rimbaud mask at different locations — at an all-night diner; riding the subway; masturbating in bed; and hanging out at the piers, the cruising ground where artists, including Wojnarowicz, liked to paint and graffiti all over the walls. (That the Whitney Museum is a short walk from the piers, the emblem of this gritty and vanished playground, in an entirely gentrified West Side of hotels, parks, expensive boutiques and fine dining, would not be lost on Wojnarowicz.) His Rimbaud is a masked melancholic, haunting “the lonely city” (to use Olivia Laing’s phrase), always standing a little apart from his surroundings. But he is also able to roam and access the secret places, protected from harm, or maybe he protects from harm, like an angel. He has a kind of freedom.He worked on and off, first at bookstores and later as a busboy at Danceteria and, when that closed, at the Peppermint Lounge. He played tape recorder in a band called 3 Teens Kill 4 (the name was taken from a tabloid headline) and made stencil graffiti, discovering the symbols that would enhance his visual grammar, including the falling man and the burning house. There was a man back in Paris he loved, and he continued to cruise (“Met a fella…” is how many of his journal entries begin). He spray-painted garbage-can lids, painted over supermarket posters, made a series of brightly colored plaster heads. When he was 26, he met Peter Hujar.Hujar was a photographer 20 years Wojnarowicz’s senior who was admired for his revelatory portraits but professionally unsuccessful, largely because he had a difficult personality and sabotaged whatever opportunities came his way. He and Wojnarowicz had a brief romance, but what followed was for both of them the most important relationship of their lives: Hujar was friend, mentor, father figure and spiritual collaborator. (“Everything I made,” Wojnarowicz said later, “I made for Peter.”) When they met, Wojnarowicz still considered himself primarily a writer, but he was putting together a portfolio of visual work. He told Hujar he was going to throw away his more disturbing drawings. Hujar advised him not to. Based on a doodle that Wojnarowicz left at Hujar’s apartment one night, he believed in Wojnarowicz’s genius, and encouraged him to dedicate himself to visual art..Wojnarowicz never stopped writing — the essay collection he published in 1991, “Close to the Knives,” is probably his most important achievement — but he did take Hujar’s advice and start to paint. First he made work about his new friend: “Peter Hujar Dreaming” presents two stenciled Hujars, one at rest and one with a head exploded into surreal and dreamy shards. Then he turned to paintings that took on, in a sweeping and aggressively ugly allegorical register, American greed, imperialism and violence.Wojnarowicz became a known face of the new East Village art scene, selling out gallery shows before they even opened. But he never identified with or felt at home in the art world. In some way he always remained the weird kid who liked to disappear into the woods and play with creepy-crawlies, the guy who, while living at the halfway house, used to feed the rat that lived on his windowsill. He thought it was funny to glue cotton tails and little paper ears onto cockroaches and call them “cock-a-bunnies.” (He released a few at the opening to a 1982 group show at MoMA PS1 that he felt he should have been included in.) Frogs and ants were ever-present symbols in his work — frogs represented “the little guy,” and ants, the only insects who take slaves and make war, were emblems of humanity.It was the ants that got him into trouble, long after his death, when the National Portrait Gallery included, in an exhibition in 2010, some footage he shot of ants crawling over a crucifix. John Boehner and Eric Cantor criticized the museum, and the footage was removed from the show. It was another example of what Wojnarowicz called “the preinvented world” — an idea his biographer, Cynthia Carr, summarizes as “false history, false spirituality, government control.” By this, Wojnarowicz meant to indict everything from stoplights and fences to “the world of language,” the whole package of behavior and social codes that punish difference and extinguish the human spark.When Hujar died in November 1987, Wojnarowicz was at his bedside. He cleared the room and used a Super 8 camera to film a sweep of Hujar’s body, and took 23 photographs of Hujar’s hands, feet and face. (Twenty-three is the number of chromosome pairs inh a human cell, and Wojnarowicz used the number in his work to signify human consciousness.) These photographs are poignant and loving and confer dignity on Hujar. They also contain the furious truth that although we all die, we don’t all die in the same way, and this particular death was not inevitable — it was bound up in the choices of a society that did not value AIDS victims enough to work harder to save them. But what Wojnarowicz was most concerned with at the moment of taking the photos was something more mysterious and universal: “I mean just the essence of death,” he wrote in “Close to the Knives”:the whole taboo structure in this culture the mystery of it the fears and joys of it the flight it contains this body of my friend on the bed this body of my brother my father my emotional link to the world this body I don’t know this pure and cutting air just all the thoughts and sensations this death this event produces in bystanders contains more spirituality than any words we can manufacture.Hujar’s death was a major turning point for Wojnarowicz. He moved into Hujar’s loft and used his darkroom; the photos he made there were some of the best work he ever did. But there was a shift in mood, too. After Hujar’s death, and after Wojnarowicz’s boyfriend, Tom Rauffenbart, received a diagnosis of AIDS, and after Wojnarowicz himself discovered that he, too, was sick, the work became more somber and more elegant. It returned to some of the sensibility of the Rimbaud series, but it’s less playful. You can feel the clock running out.One of Wojnarowicz’s famous images is a photograph of falling buffalo. (It has since trickled through the culture, appearing in the credits of the second season of “Westworld” and on the cover of U2’s single “One.”) Wojnarowicz took this shot on a visit to the National Museum of Natural History in Washington from a diorama of Native American hunting practices. The buffalo are frozen in air, careering over a cliff. Although Wojnarowicz liked to layer and collage, he allowed the buffalo to hang alone, in absolute stillness. It is a very simple picture — a critique of heedless speed, as civilization stampedes to its future destruction — and one of his bleakest. There is no turning it around for these buffalo. They can’t save themselves.Friends said Wojnarowicz got angrier the closer he got to death, but all that anger became compressed, and the work became less like a raging wildfire and more like the core of a flame. He made a strange painting, “Something From Sleep III (for Tom Rauffenbart),” of a figure hunched over a telescope; instead of a human body, the figure is the cosmos itself, constellated with planets. He also made “Sex Series,” eerie black-and-white photographs of landscapes — a train, a suburban house, the woods, a cityscape — broken by circular insets, printed to resemble a negative. “X-ray visions of a world gone awry,” is how Artforum described them. Most of the insets, or peepholes, were lifted from Hujar’s collection of pornography. It was a response to the omnipresence of death and to the fear of sex that resulted, even within the activist community. Wojnarowicz said he wanted “some sexy images on the wall — for me. To keep me company. To make me feel better.” But are the sexy images the real life that wakes us from the nightmare of history and the preinvented world? Or are they the dream-life, the memories, that provide bittersweet consolation in a reality from which we cannot wake?Some of Wojnarowicz’s most important works and writings are explicitly about suffering, and designed to make the viewer feel some of that pain: “One Day This Kid,” the photographs of Hujar dead, “Postcards From America.” Four years after Wojnarowicz died, Rauffenbart did as he suggested and drove his ashes to Washington, where he threw a handful on the White House lawn as part of an Act-Up protest. But if that raging Wojnarowicz is the only one we know, we risk making a fetish of his suffering, and forgetting the purpose of his anger.One of his last projects was four large paintings called “Americans Can’t Deal With Death,” “I Feel a Vague Nausea,” “We Are Born Into a Preinvented Existence” and “He Kept Following Me.” From a distance, they look like soft-focus paintings of flowers. As you get closer, however, you see photo insets: an American flag, a human skeleton, cells under a microscope, a soldier in a gas mask. And as you get closer still, there are dense passages of text — dreams, notes about death and illness and his friend’s suicide, fury at “the tribal nation of zombies” that offers the illusion of hope in the place of real freedom. The flower paintings contain horror and pain, but they also, overwhelmingly, communicate a sensuous beauty.Beauty is another “ritual of life,” right up there with screaming in the streets. One doesn’t replace the other, but we need both, even in the worst and darkest times. The artist Zoe Leonard remembered confessing to Wojnarowicz her anxiety that her aerial photographs of clouds didn’t reflect grim political reality. Wojnarowicz said to her: “Zoe, these are so beautiful, and that’s what we’re fighting for. We’re being angry and complaining because we have to, but where we want to go is back to beauty. If you let go of that, we don’t have anywhere to go.”For Wojnarowicz there was beauty on the horizon, and beauty here and now, intermingled with barbarism. The last essay in “Close to the Knives” is about Wojnarowicz’s friend who committed suicide. He attaches to it a postscript, a montage of recollections from a bullfight he attended in Mexico. Outside the ring is a meat market. “So little has been quartered that I could almost recognize which animal was which,” he writes. “The people waiting on line have the clothes and postures of exhausted poverty. As we stop to witness, the bulls disappear piece by piece. Behind us, far over the walls of the arena, the vague notes of the band begin again and float like thin banners across the hot sky. Meat. Blood. Memory. War. We rise to greet the State, to confront the State. Smell the flowers while you can.”An earlier version of this article misstated part of the title of an edited selection of David Wojnarowicz’s audio journals. It is “Weight of the Earth,” not “The Weight of the World.”An earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of a writer. She is Olivia Laing, not Liang.Christine Smallwood is a contributing writer for the magazine. She last wrote a feature about Greta Gerwig. Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement