https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/31/dining/recipe-lab-video-chat-on-jerusalem.html
Recipe Lab Video Chat on ‘Jerusalem’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2120
AdvertisementSupported byRecipe LabBy Sona PatelFor this month’s Recipe Lab, The Times’s Julia Moskin asked home cooks what recipe from “Jerusalem: A Cookbook” they’d most like to discuss with the authors, Yotam Ottolenghi and Sami Tamimi, in our Google+ Hangout.The suggestions flooded in.“The chicken with caramelized onions and cardamom rice has become a staple in my household,” the commenter CMR in Brooklyn said. “I would love to see that dish made and learn the finer points.” Several commenters echoed that sentiment, thus making the fragrant one-pot dish, infused with fresh herbs and served with cooling yogurt sauce, the focus of our video chat.We selected three home cooks to join Ms. Moskin, Mr. Ottolenghi and Mr. Tamimi to discuss the recipe and the book. A replay of their discussion can be watched above.Did you make the recipe? Did the chicken and rice cook evenly? Did you find cooking with whole spices problematic, or was it a breeze?Grab a serving of the chicken, pour yourself a glass of chenin blanc and enjoy.The home cooks joining us are:Sanjay Gandhi, 25, Brooklyn, N.Y.Mr. Gandhi’s cooking is strongly influenced by South Asian flavors, which stems from his upbringing in Mumbai. He credits his knowledge of basic cooking techniques to Cooks Illustrated magazine and has since been experimenting with recipes from “Eleven Madison Park: The Cookbook” and “Essentials of Classic Italian Cooking” by Marcella Hazan.Kirsten Gindler, 19, ChicagoEvery two weeks, Ms. Gindler, a junior at the University of Chicago, and her classmates hold dinner parties in which they cook at least one recipe from “Jerusalem.” One of her goals as a home cook is to become more innovative by creating her own recipes.Ruth Yudekovitz, 55, JerusalemMs. Yudekovitz has lived in Jerusalem for nearly 35 years, where she runs a food tour called Shuk and Cook. You can often find her at Machane Yehuda Market (also known as the Shuk), where she takes groups on a shopping trip and later, back to her home for a cooking workshop and meal.cookingAdvertisement