https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/18/dining/hi-collar-japanese-restaurant.html
East Meets West, and Cafe Becomes Sake Bar, at Hi-Collar - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
699
AdvertisementSupported byHungry City10 PhotosView Slide Show ›By Ligaya MishanThe flames shoot straight up, and we all lean back, watching the light tremble across the brass countertop at Hi-Collar in the East Village, a Japanese coffeehouse by day, sake bar by night.A small grill called a shichirin has been swiftly assembled on a crimson tray, with a metal grid laid over what looks like a flowerpot. Beside it is a shallow metal dish heaped with stiff translucent strips and pointed shards the size of a great white’s teeth.This is dried stingray fin, to be delivered to the flame like an offering until its edges curl inward and grow black. It puts up a bit of a fight, like the best jerky, and tastes meaty and deeply marine. Each piece is webbed with skinny filaments of ceratotrichia, rich with collagen, which may or may not keep you young.Hi-Collar opened in 2013. It is part of the quiet empire run by Bon Yagi, a native of Japan who started out in the 1980s with an East Village diner frequented by Keith Haring and Andy Warhol. His restaurants, mostly clustered around East Ninth and 10th Streets (known as Little Tokyo), include Cha-An Teahouse, the noodle-shop stalwart Sobaya and Otafuku, a purveyor of octopus balls and gooey pancakes asquirm with bonito flakes.The name Hi-Collar comes from “haikara,” Japanese slang that was originally a pejorative for young men of the late-19th-century Meiji era who wore stand-up collars like their British counterparts. Haikara soon came to mean, more positively, sophisticated and progressive; the beloved manga series “Haikara-san ga Toru” chronicled the adventures of a Jazz Age “Miss Modern,” who resisted an arranged marriage.The space is narrow and deep: 13 stools at a long bar under Tiffany-esque lamps, facing a wall of shoji screens, with Japanese matchboxes lined up precariously along its ledge. At noon, when Hi-Collar is in kissaten (coffeehouse) mode, all is bustling and bright.Come early for katsu sando, a deep-fried Berkshire pork cutlet, prickly with panko, sandwiched between slices of shokupan (Pullman-style bread enriched with milk). There are only 10 orders available each day, and you want one.On the plate, the sandwiches, cut in two and stood on their edges, call to mind prayer books. The tonkatsu sauce has the proper notes of brine from dashi and soy, offset by lemon. The bread is eerily spongy, untoasted, with the crusts banished; the better to heighten our awareness of the pork’s crunch.I might have clapped my hands when omurice arrived, looking like a piece of sushi writ large: a pallet of fried rice, stained rust-red from ketchup, under an omelet like a mighty cloud come to rest. The omelet was so creamy that with a touch it split in two and spilled its insides. On top was a sausage, incarnadine, with gaping slits, that would have been too salty if it hadn’t also been nearly too sweet — which is to say, just right.Among the desserts are chocolate truffles, bitter with sake lees, and an ice cream sundae loaded with cubes of coffee jelly whose flavor registers as a scent. Their pleasures are slightly cerebral. I preferred the hot cakes, taller and fluffier than nature should allow. The batter is poured into a mold, but the source of the fluffiness is more elusive. Some Japanese recipes reveal the use of Kewpie mayonnaise. Whatever it takes.After dark, the menu turns away from the West. On a recent evening, a customer who looked as if she might have a sweet tooth was sternly told: “No coffee. No dessert.” Instead there was sake, poured by a young man with an imperious rockabilly pompadour.The dishes are designed as interludes between sips: creamy torchons of ankimo (monkfish liver); beef tongue thick enough to wage war with the teeth. Takowasa, raw octopus chopped with wasabi, manages to be wobbly and crunchy at once, and the burn goes all the way up between the eyes.Other dishes seem like little more than ways to mark time as the night unspools, like overhoneyed petals of braised duck and bouncy triangles of hanpen (fish cakes), sweating butter.Then came a bowl of yaki-onigiri chazuke, grilled rice balls submerged in dashi broth but still tasting of char. It was steadying, after all that sake and needless brooding. I ate it slowly and left almost chastised, as if I’d just remembered what really matters.This information was last updated on Nov. 27, 2018Advertisement