http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/02/us/politics/us-lists-colleges-under-inquiry-over-sex-assault-cases.html
55 Colleges Named in Federal Inquiry Into Handling of Sexual Assault Cases - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2327
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jennifer Steinhauer and David S. JoachimWASHINGTON — The Obama administration on Thursday released the names of 55 colleges and universities under investigation for their handling of sexual assault complaints, an unusual step meant to increase pressure on the institutions to crack down on the problem on their campuses.It was the first time that the Department of Education had made public a comprehensive list of colleges under investigation for potential violations of federal antidiscrimination law under Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. The law prohibits gender discrimination at colleges that receive federal money.The colleges under investigation include Ivy League institutions like Dartmouth, Harvard and Princeton; other private universities like Boston University, the University of Chicago, Swarthmore and the University of Southern California; and public universities including Florida State, the University of Michigan, Ohio State and Penn State. The list also included less well known institutions like the West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine.The list was made public three days after the White House released a report drafted by a sexual assault task force aimed at pressuring schools to better comply with federal law and prevent sexual attacks.“We are making this list available in an effort to bring more transparency to our enforcement work and to foster better public awareness of civil rights,” Catherine E. Lhamon, the assistant education secretary for civil rights, said in a written statement.The Education Department announced on Monday that Tufts University in Boston had failed to comply with the federal law by allowing a sexually hostile environment to persist at the institution. The finding, which was the result of an investigation by the department’s Office of Civil Rights into a 2010 complaint by a student who said she was sexually assaulted, determined that Tufts had “failed to provide a prompt and equitable response” to complaints of sexual harassment and violence as required by the Title IX law.The Obama administration, which has stepped up enforcement of civil rights laws, zeroed in on colleges and universities after a series of highly publicized assaults on campuses. The problem has also been a focus on Capitol Hill as lawmakers have taken on sexual assault in the military, where similar cultural issues and institutional truculence have bedeviled the process. “Today’s move by the Department of Education is an important, helpful step for students and their parents, who until today had no way of knowing whether their school was under investigation for Title IX violations,” said Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri, who plans to conduct a survey of 350 colleges and universities nationwide to monitor their handling of sexual assault cases. “We’ll continue working to help schools provide the highest level of responsiveness and protections for victims and to require the federal government to provide the highest level of transparency on compliance and enforcement.”The White House task force found that nearly 20 percent of female college students have been assaulted, but that only 12 percent of cases are reported. It concluded that many women feared that their reports might become public, discouraging them from coming forward.The task force recommended that colleges provide better assurance of confidentiality to those who report such crimes; conduct standardized, anonymous surveys on campus assaults; and replicate a program at the University of Kentucky and other colleges that train bystanders in how to intervene.Since 2011, when the Education Department sent a letter to universities warning that they needed to better follow up on sexual assault complaints, an increasing number of students have won large damage awards in sexual assault cases filed against their colleges. The letter emphasized that complaints could be successfully pursued through the department’s civil rights office, which victims say is less cumbersome than using lawyers to file complaints.Universities have typically tried to keep the lawsuits quiet. “Information is power,” said Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, Democrat of New York, who has taken a strong interest in sexual assault in the military and on college campuses. “Which is why I am such a staunch supporter of transparency which leads to accountability.”The White House task force said that the Department of Education would post resolution agreements and compliance findings for these and recently settled cases. Erin E. Buzuvis, a Title IX expert and a law professor at Western New England University, said of the postings, “That will also be hugely valuable to motivate proactive compliance by universities and to provide more blueprints for compliance.” Student activists have led the campaign for universities and the government to be more responsive to the problem of assault on campuses, and more victims have been willing to come forward and discuss episodes that previously tended to be kept quiet. In particular, many student groups are focusing on the legal definition of consent, which can guide universities as they try to adjudicate crimes.“Using the social media site Tumblr, we uploaded photos giving voice to student reactions to laws and policies that take silence as consent,” Rory Gerberg, a Harvard graduate student who is a founder of a coalition of students to address the university’s sexual assault policy, said in an email. “The definition of consent is a core challenge in addressing campus sexual assault and the larger culture of sexism and gender-based violence that allow it to occur.” Ms. Gerberg added: “Our task is to give voice to the daily forms of violence we too often accept as inevitable. This is precisely why student activism is so important. Since I’ve become a campus advocate numerous students have approached me with their stories.”Advertisement