https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/obituaries/monkey-punch-dies.html
Monkey Punch, Creator of the Larcenous Lupin III, Dies at 81 - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
469
AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressKazuhiko Kato, the Japanese cartoonist known to his fans as Monkey Punch who created Lupin III, a manga series that has found fans worldwide and inspired television and film adaptations, died on April 11. He was 81.His office, MP Pictures, said the cause was pneumonia but did not say where he died.Created by Mr. Kato in 1967, Lupin III (it has also been rendered different ways, including Lupin the Third and Lupin 3rd) follows the adventures of Arséne Lupin III, a daring thief who travels the world stealing treasures. Mr. Kato conceived the character as a grandson of Arséne Lupin, the gentleman larcenist and master of disguise created by the French novelist Maurice Leblanc.Lupin often commits his capers with help from a sharp-eyed gunman, Daisuke Jigen; a master swordsman, Goemon Ishikawa XIII; and a femme fatale, Fujiko Mine. The gang regularly escapes the clutches of Inspector Koichi Zenigata, an Interpol officer obsessed with capturing Lupin.“I took my inspiration for the relationship from Tom and Jerry,” Mr. Kato told The Daily Yomiuri in 2007, referring to the American cat and mouse cartoon characters. “The mouse, Lupin, is cleverer than Zenigata, who is left gnashing his teeth after failing to get his man yet again.”The comic series, which has been translated into English and other languages, has appeared in installments in magazines and been collected in bound volumes.It was first adapted as an animated television show in 1971. Some episodes were directed by Hayao Miyazaki and Isao Takahata, who went on to international fame as animators and founders of Studio Ghibli. Mr. Miyazaki’s feature-length film debut was the Lupin movie “The Castle of Cagliostro” (1979).The cartoon has since been adapted many times for television and film, including two live-action movies, the latest in 2014. Mr. Kato directed the 1996 film “Lupin the 3rd: Dead or Alive.”The animated versions of Lupin differed from Mr. Kato’s original creation, which was more violent and aimed at older readers. He told The Daily Yomiuri in 2011 that he had accepted the changes to his characters for animation because if his manga “hadn’t been made into anime, it wouldn’t have enjoyed such long-term support.”“I have to be practical about it,” he continued. “Lupin III is no longer ‘mine’ when it’s being made into anime. Many producers and animators have played with the work. This is all right with me; there are many Lupin IIIs.’ ”Mr. Kato, a son of a fisherman, was born in 1937 in the small town of Hamanaka on the island of Hokkaido, in northern Japan. After graduating from high school he moved to Tokyo, where he attended an electronics vocational school and worked part time at a rental bookstore while developing his cartoons.His character Lupin first appeared in the magazine Weekly Manga Action in 1967. Mr. Kato said he started using the pseudonym Monkey Punch after an editor compared his characters’ faces to those of monkeys.Mr. Kato was an early adopter and proponent of digital animation, and he studied animation in multimedia formats at a technical graduate school in Tokyo in the 2000s. He also taught animation at Otemae University in Nishinomiya, in western Japan.Information about survivors was not immediately available.The New York Times contributed reporting.Advertisement