https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/dining/what-to-cook-this-week.html
What to Cook This Week - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
75
AdvertisementSupported byWhat to CookBy Sam SiftonAll hail our Samin Nosrat, queen of screen, bookshelf and newsprint! She’s in The New York Times Magazine this weekend with a terrific “Eat” column about the young cook Ella Kerr, whose recipe for fried cauliflower steaks is on the menu at Standard Fare in Berkeley, where her mother Kelsie Kerr is the chef. I’d like to cook that today, layer it into a sandwich as if I were Tyler Kord, put some potato chips and smoked French dressing on it, some scallions, eat it picnic-style in the yard or a park, at sunset.But first, a late brunch: Daniela Galarza’s new recipe for the soufflé-like confection known as a Japanese pancake (above), which she wrote about this week and I’d like with a pile of sweet, perfect blueberries. (If they’re not perfect, don’t buy them. Get strawberries instead, or just-ripe bananas to slice into coins.)Monday, how about pasta with fried slices of lemon and plenty of chile flakes, another meatless meal with flavor for miles?I’ll get you an imaginary table at Rao’s on Tuesday night, and you can serve yourself the chicken scarpariello on it. (Imagine yourself playing cards in the kitchen afterward, with Shawn and Harvey.)For Wednesday dinner, give this kale and quinoa salad a try, with crisp-edged tofu and plenty of miso pop.Thursday, you could turn to this luscious recipe for a pan-cooked steak with just three ingredients beyond the beef: butter, ginger and soy sauce. Eat with steamed rice and simply braised greens for a dinner of huge flavor and remarkable simplicity.If you’re celebrating Passover on Friday, you can cook your brisket while you’re making the steak, and cleaning up, and walking the dog, allowing it to bubble along in the oven until late, when you can pull it out and let it cool and get it into the refrigerator. Or you can start it late, let it cook overnight, and then get it into the refrigerator while you attend to breakfast.Either way, reheat for dinner. Passover on Shabbat, how cool. (Alternatively, round out your week with a Mex-Cajun take on fish tacos that the chef Chad Shaner used to cook when he worked at the old Union Square Café in Manhattan. Good Friday!)Thousands more recipes you might consider cooking this week are on NYT Cooking. (Here’s how to take out a subscription to our site and apps.) Of course we have Passover recipes lined up for you. We have loads of Easter recipes, too.You can find further inspiration on our Instagram page, and conversation galore on our accounts on Twitter and Facebook. If you need help with your account, though, or just want to talk to someone here at The Times, just write: cookingcare@nytimes.com. We’ll get back to you.Now, I know it’s off-topic for those obsessed with Greek yogurt and the price of Camembert, but I think maybe you’ll enjoy this intense oral history of George magazine, in the Hollywood Reporter. I know you’ll thrill to the photographs. They’re amazing.This is a good Eartha Kitt story.I’ve said for a long time now that Sharon Horgan and Rob Delaney, of “Catastrophe,” play the best married couple on television since Kyle Chandler and Connie Britton in “Friday Night Lights.” That’s why I won’t watch the fourth and final season of the show until I grow sick of the jokes in the trailer. I want to have something to look forward to. I don’t want it to end.Finally, Kate Betts on Ruth Reichl’s memoir about running “Gourmet”? Yes, please. Delicious. See you tomorrow.cookingcookingAdvertisement