https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/17/magazine/the-consequences-of-our-consequence-free-society.html
The Consequences of Our Consequence-Free Society - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
309
AdvertisementSupported byNotebookBy Mark LeibovichLately I’ve been thinking about the notion of false courage. It was introduced to me by an unlikely philosopher king: the Dallas Cowboys’ owner, Jerry Jones, whom I interviewed for an article on the N.F.L. that ran in the Feb. 7 issue of the magazine. We were talking about proposals on how to improve player safety in football. Jones mentioned to me a counterintuitive idea that Lamar Hunt, the founding owner of the Kansas City Chiefs, once suggested.“Hunt thought we should take the face mask off of football helmets,” Jones told me. Why? Jones explained that face masks can foster an illusion of protection. “Lamar Hunt thought the face mask gave a player false courage,” Jones explained. “It gave the impression he could launch headfirst, and the face mask would protect him.”I have since found myself thinking about false courage in other contexts. As a political culture, we are drowning in false courage. For all the exposure and exhibitionism that social media has allowed for, it has also has created a cesspool of anonymity — and what is anonymity if not a social face mask and sweeping enabler of false courage?You can type pretty much anything you want these days with very little risk of discovery, let alone shame. People send me the most vile emails and tweets without any fear of anyone — namely me — learning who they are. I don’t much care; I am numb to their abuse. As with everyone who writes for the Internet, that is my default. I don’t mean to be glib here, especially as a man — I fully realize that for female writers, the line between run-of-the-mill Internet moron and a genuine threat can be hard to discern. But learned indifference is my face mask. No one gets embarrassed after a while because no one cares.Last week, I wrote a brief article about Hillary Clinton. Nothing guarantees a faster descent into the cesspool than writing something — anything — about Hillary Clinton. I could list examples, but, you know, family newspaper. I received one particularly vulgar email via The Times’s feedback queue from a reader who identified himself as “Handsome Dave.” Without getting into his particular anatomical eloquences, I admit that I forwarded his note to a few friends with a sarcastic rejoinder about the quality of some of our readers. One person I sent Handsome Dave’s missive to was Tom Brokaw, the retired NBC News anchor, who has had a firsthand view of how fast our notions of common respect in the public discourse have disintegrated. Brokaw’s take on Handsome Dave: “It is that mentality and sense of empowerment that allows Trump to get away with his style.”It’s always easy to roll eyes at traditional media types’ wringing hands over “the coarsening of our culture” or some such. But it’s also worth noting that the coarsening norms of the Internet can bear much resemblance these days to what’s actually coming from the candidates’ town halls and debate stages. Today’s politics nurtures its own ethic of false courage. For as scrutinized and unprivate as the lives of politicians have become, I would venture that they can get away with much more today than they used to; the speed of the news cycle, the shrinking of attention spans and the sheer volume of information practically dictates as much. People used to have time to digest information, and leaders were better regulated by higher capacities for shame. Community decency standards were higher. Everyone’s outrage reserves were much less overtaxed. Now everything burns off in a few days, no matter how noxious.Brokaw mentioned Donald Trump. Trump is probably the best example of a politician that has insulated himself from the outrages he perpetrates by never apologizing, simply throwing himself into the next news cycle and explaining away what used to be called “gaffes” as proof of how honest and refreshing and nonpolitician-like his style is. But it’s not just Trump. All politicians today seem to operate with a greater sense of invulnerability — the belief that a deft media strategy can neutralize any consequences.A lot of people, for instance, would like to know what Hillary Clinton said in her paid addresses at Goldman Sachs. But no tapes or transcripts have been made public, probably in deference to an understanding between the vendor (Clinton) and client (Goldman) that her speeches stay private. Likewise, when Mitt Romney made his ill-fated remarks in 2012 about how he did not care about the 47 percent of the electorate that would not vote for him, he probably believed that his words would not become public.Candidates now construct their own face masks by virtue of whatever quotient of shamelessness they can abide in themselves — which would seem to be a lot and increasing. When you keep shocking people, it becomes harder to shock the next time. And you lose capacity for shame. You build up antibodies and eventually a sense of immunity. People become less easily outraged by the shattering of taboos, and a candidate becomes emboldened to go further next time. Shamelessness is false courage disguised as refreshing straight-talk.Writing in Vox last week, Ezra Klein had the most astute take on Trump’s terrifying powers of self-immunization:Shame is our most powerful restraint on politicians who would find success through demagoguery. Most people feel shame when they’re exposed as liars, when they’re seen as uninformed, when their behavior is thought cruel, when respected figures in their party condemn their actions, when experts dismiss their proposals, when they are mocked and booed and protested.Trump doesn’t. He has the reality-television star’s ability to operate entirely without shame, and that permits him to operate entirely without restraint. It is the single scariest facet of his personality. It is the one that allows him to go where others won’t, to say what others can’t, to do what others wouldn’t.I have no proposal to alleviate this shamelessness epidemic, modest or otherwise. In the absence of a candidate’s own capacity for shame, only the electorate can impose it. Only a critical mass of decency can, in the long run, drown out the ugly likes of Handsome Dave. What’s even more amazing about this election cycle is that what used to be considered disgraceful is now rewarded with exhilaration and intense interest.There’s another analogy here to the runaway success and popularity of the N.F.L. One of the most memorable games of the season occurred last month when the Pittsburgh Steelers pulled off a miraculous comeback to defeat the Cincinnati Bengals in the first round of the playoffs. The game’s end was marked by a belligerent chaos of fights, rowdy fan behavior, dirty hits and brutal injuries, much of it involving Vontaze Burfict, the volatile Cincinnati linebacker. The CBS announcer Phil Simms labeled the scene a “disgrace,” echoing the views of many viewers, including the league’s commissioner. (Burfict was suspended for the first three games of next season).I agree, the game was a disgrace. And such an unbelievable game: I was talking about it for days. And TV ratings remained high throughout the playoffs and the Super Bowl and the Republican debates.Mark Leibovich is the chief national correspondent for the magazine.Advertisement