https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/03/books/in-ben-lerners-1004-new-york-is-a-character.html
In Ben Lerner’s ‘10:04,’ New York Is a Character - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1769
AdvertisementSupported byBooks of The TimesBy Dwight GarnerIn the new issue of Tin House, the literary quarterly, there’s a terrific conversation — conducted on Google Chat — between Annie Nugent Baker, the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright, and the novelist Benjamin Baker Nugent, her brother.At one point, Ms. Baker says, nearly out the blue, “I’m so scared of contemporary fiction that isn’t Ben Lerner.” Her brother asks why, and her reply commences this way: “I’m scared of contemporary fiction because it often seems to me like the author is trying to write something that could be easily adapted into a movie.” Fie on intense plot, she says. She wants intense language and intellection.These snippets of sibling dialogue leapt out at me because I’d just finished reading Mr. Lerner’s new novel, “10:04,” and had experienced similar thoughts.Mr. Lerner is among the most interesting young American novelists at present for several reasons, one being that he’s akin to a young Brooklynite version of the Norwegian novelist Karl Ove Knausgaard. That is, in his books, little happens, yet everything happens. Small moments come steeped in vertiginous magic.Mr. Lerner’s new novel, his second, has a futuristic title and an unsettling cover, an aerial photograph of Manhattan at night that you have to look at twice to absorb. For one thing, the image has been reversed, so the West Village is about where the Lower East Side should be.For another, the lower-middle portions of the city’s thorax are dark. This is a photograph, you realize, from October 2012, when Hurricane Sandy knocked out power to portions of Manhattan’s grid. It’s an image that evokes this book’s destabilized atmosphere, what Mr. Lerner’s protagonist describes at one point as his “residency late in the empire of drones.”(Apocalyptic photographs of the Northeast’s recent weather events are making the rounds on covers this fall. Richard Ford’s forthcoming book, “Let Me Be Frank With You,” features an eerie image of a Jersey Shore roller coaster submerged in the Atlantic.)Mr. Lerner’s title, “10:04,” is a reference to both Christian Marclay’s video art installation “The Clock” and to his unnamed narrator’s favorite movie, “Back to the Future.” In the film, 10:04 p.m. is when lightning strikes the courthouse tower, allowing Michael J. Fox’s character to return to 1985. The reference to “Back to the Future” is resonant because Mr. Lerner plays so adeptly with temporality. In “10:04,” he’s written a striking and important novel of New York City, partly because he’s so cognizant of both past and present. He’s a walker in the city in conscious league with Walt Whitman, but also with writers up through Teju Cole, whose protagonists are wide-awake flâneurs.“10:04” gives us intense moments on the High Line and in Prospect Park, and there are urban sublimes glimpsed while the narrator is jacked up on a dentist’s painkillers. When he observes Manhattan from Brooklyn, he sees not only “the liquid sapphire and ruby of traffic on the F.D.R. and the present absence of the towers” but imagines “bundled debt” and “trace amounts of antidepressants in the municipal water.” We come to relish seeing the world through this man’s eyes.Mr. Lerner’s novel picks up more or less where his last one, “Leaving the Atocha Station” (2011), left off. Which is to say that this novel is also vaguely autobiographical and metafictional; it’s about a 33-year-old man who is writing a second novel.The author, who is also a poet, has his narrator describe his method in “10:04” as one that he hopes will resemble poetry. “Part of what I loved about poetry was how the distinction between fiction and nonfiction didn’t obtain,” he says, “how the correspondence between text and world was less important than the intensities of the poem itself.” This story begins during Hurricane Irene and ends during Hurricane Sandy, a night in the city when, the narrator recalls, there is “a strange energy crackling among us: part parade, part flight, part protest.” Between these events, and underneath the high winds, the emotional core of “10:04” details the relationship between the narrator and Alex, a close friend from college. She hopes to have a baby, with his sperm.A scene in which the protagonist masturbates into an in vitro fertilization vial at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital is a small comic masterpiece of wayward post-“Portnoy’s Complaint” onanism. An awkward sex scene between the two — they can’t stop laughing — is nearly as winning. Does he want to be a father, the narrator wonders, or merely a donor? He worries that he is “no more a functioning adult than Pluto was a planet.” What’s more, he has health issues that go beyond his possibly defective sperm. He has a “potentially aneurysmal dilation of my aortic root” that may kill him, if a possible brain tumor does not end him first.Mr. Lerner artfully blends other bite-size narratives into “10:04,” including a spell at a writing colony in Marfa, Tex., and a mordant consideration of whether Ronald Reagan and Peggy Noonan are responsible for making the narrator a poet. He is a constantly vivid observer of the world. About morning ablutions, he writes in a bit of this novel that arrives as verse:“Shaving is a way to start the workday by ritually not cutting your throat when you’ve the chance.” The narrator is a member of the Park Slope Food Coop, and there are extended and jaggedly sharp meditations on food and politics. One of these begins by noting “a new biopolitical vocabulary for expressing racial and class anxiety: Instead of claiming brown and black people were biologically inferior, you claimed they were — for reasons you sympathized with, reasons that weren’t really their fault — compromised by the food and drink they ingested; all those artificial dyes had darkened them on the inside.” In a novel that is so excellent on grief of many stripes, this observation stands out: “If you want to pick out the devastated or soon-to-be-devastated from the stream of people leaving Mount Sinai, I decided, don’t look for the frank expressions of sorrow or concern, look for people whose faces resemble those of passengers deplaning after a long flight — a blank expression as the body begins adjusting to a new time zone and ground speed.” At one point in “10:04,” the narrator is having dinner with his agent. They consume baby octopuses “massaged gently but relentlessly with unrefined salt until their biological functions cease.” (I would read a book of food writing from Mr. Lerner.)He tells her he hopes his novel will be, on some level, “a long list of things that quicken the heart.” At this he has succeeded perfectly. 10:04  By Ben Lerner  Illustrated. 244 pages. Faber and Faber. $25.Advertisement