https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/28/opinion/manafort-pardon-trump-mueller-pardon-.html
Opinion | Why Did Manafort Cooperate With Trump Over Mueller?  - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
999
AdvertisementSupported byLawyers for Manafort and Trump engaged in a brazen violation of criminal defense norms. The move could pay off, or it could blow up spectacularly. By Ken WhiteMr. White, a criminal defense lawyer, is a former federal prosecutor.Two significant developments seem to have kicked Robert Mueller’s investigation into a new gear: First, prosecutors say, the former Trump campaign chairman and convicted felon Paul Manafort violated his cooperation agreement with them, and second, Mr. Manafort’s lawyers are said to have been leaking the details of that cooperation to President Trump’s legal team.On Monday, Mr. Mueller filed an incendiary status report accusing Mr. Manafort of breaching their cooperation agreement, lying to the F.B.I. and committing further federal crimes after his September guilty plea to fraud and other charges. Mr. Mueller’s team, which held off Mr. Manafort’s sentencing while he supposedly cooperated — and, it should be noted, while Mr. Trump completed his written responses to questions from Mr. Mueller’s team of prosecutors — has now asked the federal judges hearing his cases in Washington and Virginia to sentence him promptly on what are certain to be very harsh terms. Mr. Mueller will be documenting his accusations lavishly and publicly in his sentencing position papers.On Tuesday, The Times reported that Mr. Manafort’s lawyers have been telling Mr. Trump’s lawyers what the special counsel asked Mr. Manafort and what the latter said in response.The first development isn’t much of a surprise. Wise prosecutors know that cooperating witnesses can be notoriously unreliable. It’s not unusual for prosecutors to catch cooperators in lies or recidivism.But the second development — that Mr. Manafort’s lawyers have been spilling the details of their client’s cooperation to Trump lawyers under the cover of an often-used but little-understood pact called a joint defense agreement — is shocking. The revelation is a potential catastrophe for everyone involved. It’s a blow to Mr. Mueller’s team, because their questions to Mr. Manafort — repeated to Mr. Trump’s lawyers — may be a road map to at least part of the special counsel investigation. Mr. Trump’s lawyers can now adjust their defense, and the president’s responses, based on what they’ve learned about Mr. Mueller’s focus and what he knows or doesn’t know. And with their filing on Monday asserting Mr. Manafort’s dishonesty, the prosecutors lost him as a cooperating witness and can no longer pursue any theory relying on his testimony. It’s a blow to Mr. Manafort, who will receive no sentencing credit for his brief cooperation. It’s a blow to Mr. Manafort’s lawyers; no federal prosecutor will ever trust them again. And it’s a blow to Mr. Trump, who has overplayed his hand, because Mr. Mueller may now be able to delve into the Trump lawyers’ conversations with Mr. Manafort’s lawyers.Mr. Manafort, like many of the hapless former luminaries snared in Mr. Mueller’s investigation, had a joint defense agreement with Mr. Trump. Such a pact lets defense lawyers exchange information without waiving attorney-client privilege. Under normal circumstances, if a lawyer reveals what a client said in confidence, or reveals strategy and analysis of a case, that information is no longer confidential, and the government can compel testimony about it. A joint defense agreement allows lawyers for people with a common interest in a case to share what they learned from clients without that information losing its confidential nature. Because everyone in the agreement has a common interest in defending the case and has agreed to keep the information secret, the theory goes, sharing the information within the group doesn’t waive its confidentiality. Joint defense agreements are common in white-collar investigations because they allow lawyers to figure out two crucial things: what happened and what the prosecutor knows about it. Mr. Trump’s lawyers have made vigorous use of such pacts — we’ve learned he has them with Mr. Manafort and with the Roger Stone confidant Jerome Corsi. But the pacts almost always explicitly require the parties to withdraw from the agreement immediately if they cooperate with the government. After all, once someone begins to cooperate, his interests are no longer common with the other members of the joint defense agreement — by definition, they’re now adverse. This is often how we learn that someone will soon plead guilty: The former national security adviser Michael Flynn had a defense pact with the president, but his withdrawal from it signaled his cooperation and plea. The objectives of a cooperation agreement like the one Mr. Manafort entered with Mr. Mueller are flatly inconsistent with the obligations of a joint defense agreement. So it doesn’t matter whether or not Mr. Manafort explicitly withdrew from his deal with Mr. Trump, because once he began cooperating — or, at least, pretending to — the legal theory supporting the agreement collapsed. Because Mr. Manafort no longer had, on paper, a “common interest” with Mr. Trump, his lawyers’ communications with Mr. Trump’s lawyers could no longer be seen as cloaked with any expectation of confidentiality. If they revealed client confidences, they waived the attorney-client privilege. Mr. Mueller can, and perhaps should, try to find out what Mr. Trump’s and Mr. Manafort’s lawyers said to one another about their respective clients after Mr. Manafort began cooperating. The resulting legal battles over privilege would be spectacular.Some analysts speculate that Mr. Mueller intended this result — that he knew that Mr. Manafort would lie to him, knew that Mr. Manafort’s lawyers would brief Mr. Trump on those lies, and knew that Mr. Trump would foolishly repeat those lies in his written statement to Mr. Mueller, thus committing a new federal crime.That’s a good plot for a legal thriller, but it’s not how real federal prosecutors work. Mr. Mueller is a by-the-book sort of prosecutor, not one to indulge in such ploys. To the extent he trusted Mr. Manafort and revealed details of his investigation, he made a mistake. Of course, the president’s team — never a font of shrewd criminal defense strategy — may have made a mistake, too, if they incorporated Mr. Manafort’s lies into their own written responses to Mr. Mueller’s questions. That could expand the scope of Mr. Mueller’s investigation to include new false statements to the F.B.I., the downfall of several of his targets.Mr. Mueller’s mistake is understandable. Mr. Manafort’s lawyers’ communications with Mr. Trump’s lawyers are shocking and unprecedented, a brazen violation of criminal defense norms notable even in an investigation full of them. They are consistent with only one conclusion: Mr. Manafort and his lawyers seek a presidential pardon, not a reduced sentence through sincere cooperation.Ken White, a former federal prosecutor, is a criminal defense lawyer and First Amendment litigator at Brown White & Osborn in Los Angeles, and a host of “All the President’s Lawyers,” on radio station KCRW.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement