https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/26/smarter-living/if-its-not-a-100-yes-its-a-no.html
If You’re Not All-In About a New Opportunity, Just Say No - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
132
AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim HerreraWelcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. The editor, Tim Herrera, emails readers with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.That one little piece of advice is really all you ever need to know, if you ask me.The idea is an obvious one, but it’s incredibly powerful, and it’s something we’ve talked about in this newsletter before: Figure out what’s core to your identity, the things you’re truly passionate about, and dive into them head-first.If an opportunity inspires genuine excitement in you — whether it’s at work, in your personal life or anywhere else — then dive in 100 percent and don’t look back. But if that spark isn’t there, even if you’re pretty excited about it, it’s a no. The binary here is a little dramatic, sure, but the lesson is crucial: If you don’t love it, don’t do it.This particular variation of this philosophy — “If it’s not a ‘hell yeah,’ it’s a ‘no’” — comes from Derek Sivers, who said years ago: “We’re all busy, we’ve all taken on too much. Saying yes to less is the way out.”Kristin Wong, a friend of Smarter Living, expanded on this idea for The Times, writing that “when we dole out an easy yes instead of a difficult no we tend to overcommit our time, energy and finances.”Yes, some of these decisions are made for us. We can’t exactly quit paying rent or a mortgage because we’re not super jazzed about it. But for the decisions that are under our control, declining is a powerful tool, and it’s one we shouldn’t feel shy about deploying.In a 2014 study at Columbia University, people were asked to gauge how assertive they thought they appeared. That was then compared with how assertive others perceived them as. The results of the study showed that we tend to overestimate our own assertiveness.In other words: Even if you think you’re being rude or pushy by saying no, you’re probably not coming off that way. Saying “no” to the right things can even earn you more respect at work.Still, there a few things to keep in mind. You want to be firm, but not rude. Explanations of your reasoning can help. Be mindful of your priorities. And, often most important, remember you’re saying no to the request, not the person. No reason to burn bridges over a no, after all.What are you saying “no” to this week? Tell me on Twitter or email me at tim@nytimes.com.Have a great week!—TimHow to Save Money and Energy Heating Your Apartment We’ve compiled free, low-cost, reversible and take-it-with-you changes renters can make in their homes to save on their heating bills.Want to Plan for Your Death and Funeral? Here’s How Pre-need funeral plans can be complicated, so here is a primer on everything you’ll need to know.How to Break Up With Your Phone Nine ways to have a healthier relationship with your phone.How to Manage Stress Like an Olympic Biathlete The pressure of an intense physical race combined with methodical target shooting gives biathletes a unique perspective on coping with stress.In an Era of ‘Smart’ Things, Sometimes Dumb Stuff Is Better Take a moment to appreciate some of the objects that can remain unplugged.How to Fit in Exercise While You Travel Traveling, whether for business or pleasure, is no reason to leave your fitness goals behind. Here’s how to get a good workout on the go.What better time than a new year to think about your career. Are you doing what you truly want to be doing? And if you are, have you set yourself on the right path to keep doing it?If you’re among the many people who resolved this year to work on their careers, here are three things to keep in mind. (And if you’d like to dive even deeper, here is our full guide on how to manage your career.)Don’t count out networkingThe idea of networking can sometimes have sleazy or dark associations, but it doesn’t have to: Networking done right is simply widening the pool of people you know in your industry.Studies have shown that even “weak ties” — people we know only casually — can often provide doorways into other networks, so don’t limit yourself by your definition of what “networking” means. And always remember to just be sincere.Ask for that raiseFour crucial things to remember, from our guide:1. Do research on salaries in your field. Discussing salaries can be difficult, but consider talking to colleagues or former co-workers.2. Collect complimentary testimonials and comments from evaluations.3. Rehearse your arguments. Not just on paper, but speak them aloud (yes, it will help to have a friend play the boss).4. Don’t chicken out and make your request for a raise via email. Set up a meeting time with your boss and signal that it will be an important conversation.Time to quit?Maybe this is the year you finally leave that dead-end job! In truth, only you can know if that’s the right decision, but here’s a little guidance that might help.Thank you for reading! If you enjoyed today’s newsletter, please consider sending it along to your friends; they can subscribe here. I’d also love to connect on social media; you can follow me on Twitter or Instagram. And if you have any feedback or suggestions on what you’d like to see in this newsletter, email me at tim@nytimes.com.Advertisement