https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/06/magazine/the-plot-to-take-down-a-fox-news-analyst.html
The Plot to Take Down a Fox News Analyst - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
324
FeatureFor years, Wayne Simmons claimed to be a former C.I.A. operative. Then one ex-spook got suspicious.Wayne Simmons, a Fox News analyst now accused of fraud.CreditCreditLarry Fink for The New York TimesSupported byBy Alex FrenchKent Clizbe, a 55-year-old former C.I.A. officer and intelligence contractor, has cultivated a diverse set of interests in his later years. He loves bird watching and participates in his local Christmas Bird Count, an informal census organized by the Audubon Society. He has a patent on a device, the TimeOff, that prevents unattended-stove fires. But Clizbe’s true motivating force — a holdover, perhaps, from his decade with the agency — is an unrelenting compulsion to get to the bottom of things. He vets every person he meets, interrogating every fact presented to him. This perpetual need to turn everything inside out is the defining trait of Clizbe’s personality, and he remains faithful to it, even when it incurs him great personal expense.Clizbe grew up poor in Halifax County, North Carolina, raised by a single mother. In 1980, after failing out of East Carolina University, he joined the Air Force. Aptitude tests revealed a gift for languages, so Clizbe enrolled in intensive Vietnamese courses and then was shipped to the Philippines, where he spent three years monitoring Vietnamese radio communications. When his tour ended, he went back to school at Southern Illinois University. On campus, he fell in love with a Malaysian girl, who told him that if he wanted to marry her, he would have to convert to Islam. He converted, married her and followed her back to Southeast Asia, where he found work at a refugee camp in the Philippines. Clizbe made frequent trips to her hometown outside Kuala Lumpur, where he immersed himself in the local customs.He and his wife lived in Asia for a year before finding jobs at the business college at King Saud University in Qassim Province in Saudi Arabia. He taught English as a second language and made the pilgrimage to Mecca. It was 1988, and the war in Afghanistan was dragging on. At the mosque on Fridays, Clizbe would hear calls for young men to travel east and wage jihad against the communists.After returning to the United States in 1990, Clizbe earned a master’s degree in linguistics and studied business and instructional design. While he searched for a job, he sometimes paid the bills by working the phones at a venereal-disease hotline. He was eventually hired by the C.I.A. as an operations officer.He was sent to an island overseas, where he worked a day job unrelated to his real responsibilities. At night he recruited spies. His experiences in the Philippines, Malaysia and Saudi Arabia all came in handy. ‘‘You have to understand your target and immerse yourself in his or her culture and the context from which they come,’’ he said. ‘‘Do they have access to something of interest to you? Are they suitable to do what you want them to do? What are their motivations? What problems do they have that I can solve? Solve their problems, and they’ll become your best friend forever.’’ (This fixation on immersion was a big reason Clizbe practiced Islam in the Muslim world; he stopped going to mosques, for the most part, after leaving.) He told me that during his first overseas tour, he probably recruited as many spies as anybody else in his region. ‘‘I was really, really good at what I did,’’ he said. ‘‘Never pitched somebody who said no. This process of elicitation is really like the slow hitching up of a woman’s skirt.’’Clizbe quit the C.I.A. in 1999 but returned shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks, working as a contractor. In 2008, he started a blog about intelligence and public affairs that mercilessly criticized the Obama administration, including his eventual boss, John Brennan. The political tension cost him his next contract, he said, so he focused on his writing. He had self-published books with titles like ‘‘Willing Accomplices: How K.G.B. Covert Influence Agents Created Political Correctness and Destroyed America’’ and ‘‘Obliterating Exceptionalism: A Chronicle of Obama’s Politically Correct Progressive Destruction of America.’’ He wrote articles for conservative sites like Newsmax and Breitbart, joining a universe that has expanded over the last decade and a half with people like him: generals, intelligence workers and special-forces veterans who found that, like everyone else, they could now contribute directly to mass media.In the fall of 2010, Clizbe was summoned from his Northern Virginia home to a restaurant at Baltimore-Washington International Airport for lunch with a Department of Defense contractor named Kerry Patton. The two had grown friendly on an email list affiliated with the International Association for Intelligence Education. The lunch was Patton’s idea; he wanted Clizbe to meet a mentor of his, Wayne Simmons. Simmons had served in the C.I.A. for 27 years and appeared regularly as an analyst on Fox News. He was ‘‘all Kerry could talk about,’’ Clizbe recalls.Though Simmons had become well known to people in that right-wing media circle, Clizbe didn’t know his name. He never encountered Simmons during his days with the C.I.A. — it’s a massive, compartmentalized organization, after all — and he didn’t have cable TV. Still, Simmons and Clizbe should have had plenty to discuss. Their political leanings were similar enough. Simmons claimed to be ‘‘far right of Attila the Hun.’’ But something about Simmons didn’t sit right with Clizbe.Over lunch, it seemed to Clizbe that Simmons was oblivious to the routine ‘‘butt-sniffing’’ that C.I.A. veterans routinely engage in: questions about time spent at the ‘‘Farm’’ and about stints in war zones. Simmons said he had operated separately from Langley; he hinted at brazen operations against drug cartels, opining on the painful isolation of an operative’s existence. ‘‘ ‘You and me, we know what it’s like,’ ’’ Clizbe recalls him saying. ‘‘ ‘It’s how we have to live our lives.’ ’’Clizbe added: ‘‘He was so full of bluster that anybody who hadn’t been in the C.I.A. would have had their socks knocked off. But the things he said were so not C.I.A.’’Five years later, in October of last year, Simmons — who, as a frequent guest on Fox News discussing intelligence matters, had become a prominent commentator on national security — was arrested for fraud, on charges that (among other things) he used a fictitious background in the C.I.A. to gain real government contract work. Today, the garrulous 62-year-old is under house arrest pending trial. He claims that he was done in by a vindictive Obama administration, which is taking advantage of the fact that his agency past, while real, is almost unfathomably classified. ‘‘Nobody could see us,’’ he said. ‘‘Nobody knew who we were. The program I was in was so black it made the black hole seem white.’’Fox News may have been surprised by the allegations, as were many close to Simmons, but doubts about his background had percolated for years within Clizbe’s social network of ex-spooks, and they began in earnest at that fateful lunch in 2010. As Clizbe drove home, his thoughts drifted to a passage from George MacDonald Fraser’s 1969 novel ‘‘Flashman,’’ about a wealthy misfit who, because of a series of misunderstandings, earns a reputation as a war hero. It opens on the fraudulent narrator considering a portrait of himself: ‘‘I can look at the picture above my desk, of the young officer . . . tall, masterful and roughly handsome . . . and say that it is the portrait of a scoundrel, a liar, a cheat, a thief, a coward — and, oh yes, a toady.’’As Wayne Simmons tells it, his career as a talking head began with a chance encounter on a train. In 2001, on a Washington-bound Acela, he got to talking with Mike Collins, a public-relations executive who was a former press secretary for the Republican National Committee. Simmons told him about his experiences in the C.I.A., and Collins asked Simmons if he was interested in going on TV. Simmons said, ‘‘Why not?’’ He paid Collins a couple hundred dollars for three days of media training. A few weeks later, a producer from Fox called and asked if he would do a quick spot on Geraldo Rivera’s show. Simmons was nervous, he said, but performed well. (Collins, who has been named as a potential witness for the prosecution, declined to comment. Fox could not confirm how Simmons came to the network.)Soon after that, Fox bookers started calling, inviting him to appear on more shows: Rita Cosby, Neil Cavuto, Bill O’Reilly, Hannity and Colmes. Not only was Simmons a good talker, he was also courteous, dependable and willing to make the trek from his home in Annapolis, Md., to the bureau in Washington whenever he was needed. And he was a guest, not a contributor, so he worked free.By the time of the invasion of Iraq in 2003, Simmons was a regular on the network, talking primarily about terrorism. His tidy gray mustache and smoky-lensed glasses lent him an air of mystery. Everything else about his appearance — the fullback’s neck, razor-sharp jawline and power suits — amplified his message of American supremacy through force. His opinions were cartoonishly belligerent. He defended the enhanced-interrogation techniques employed by the Bush-era C.I.A. In 2005, after Al Jazeera broadcast footage of Ayman al-Zawahri calling for jihad on the West, Simmons suggested one way to contain the terrorist’s message was to ‘‘locate Al Jazeera and blow them off the map.’’ He urged lawmakers to consider a moratorium on the construction of mosques in the United States. After The Times exposed the Bush administration’s covert terrorist-finance-tracking program in 2006, he suggested the paper’s sources ought to be imprisoned and maybe even face a firing squad.In 2005, Simmons was invited to join a Defense Department effort called the Retired Military Analysts program. Started in 2002 during the Bush administration’s push for a U.S. invasion of Iraq, the program recruited retired military officers who had high-profile jobs as cable-news experts to be Defense Department ‘‘message force multipliers.’’ They were given regular briefings from Donald Rumsfeld, then the secretary of defense, as well as access to other high-ranking department officials. There were trips to Iraq and Guantánamo Bay. It was all done in an effort to win favorable but independent-seeming news coverage for the administration’s foreign policy.Cable-news bookers typically do not run extensive background checks. Standards vary from show to show, but according to producers and bookers I spoke with, a cursory look at an expert’s website is usually sufficient. (In a statement, Fox News said its vetting procedure is as thorough as possible.) But it’s somewhat more surprising that the Retired Military Analysts program did not include a thorough check, either. While many participants in the program did have top-secret clearances, program events were ‘‘no clearance necessary’’: Any time Simmons wanted to visit the Pentagon or hop on a jet to Iraq, he simply submitted his date of birth, Social Security number and a photo ID for a check that verified only that he was an American citizen and wasn’t on any watch lists.Simmons was prolific. He was making up to six appearances a month, rarely straying from the administration’s talking points. Even after the Defense Department wound down the program in 2008, Simmons continued to appear on Fox, often pushing a message of wounded honor about the new president’s national-security agenda. Shortly after the ‘‘underwear bomber’’ attack in Detroit, Simmons called Obama a ‘‘boy king’’ who emboldened terrorists and third-world despots. In 2009, after Nancy Pelosi claimed the C.I.A. misled her about waterboarding, Simmons called her a ‘‘pathological liar’’ who had made the agency soft, weakening national security. He recognized, too, the dangers hidden in America’s own bureaucracy. A Lebanese woman was discovered to have faked a marriage certificate to gain U.S. citizenship, got a job with the F.B.I. and accessed sensitive materials relating to her family and Hezbollah. ‘‘This has exposed the raw nerve, if you will, of a flaw in the background check,’’ Simmons told viewers. ‘‘Without a background check, without knowing who we’re hiring and who we are employing to protect our nation, we are in big, big trouble.’’Upon returning home from lunch that day in 2010, Clizbe sat at his computer and started looking into Simmons’s background. The biography that Clizbe pieced together was breathtaking. Recruited by the C.I.A. after joining the U.S. Navy in 1973, Simmons became part of an ‘‘outside paramilitary special operations group’’ and spearheaded ‘‘deep cover intel ops’’ against the world’s most dangerous terrorists, drug traffickers, arms smugglers, counterfeiters, cyberterrorists and industrial and economic espionage artists. His operations helped lead to the seizures of marijuana, cocaine and heroin with a combined value of more than $1 billion. Since leaving the C.I.A., he had become the president of a small airline and the general manager of a mortgage broker. According to Clizbe, Simmons was ‘‘the id of every aging conservative male.’’Clizbe’s suspicions grew deeper, so he began compiling the obvious inaccuracies. He had never heard of an ‘‘outside paramilitary special operations group.’’ The Secret Service fights counterfeiters, not the C.I.A. The F.B.I. would fight industrial espionage. None of it made sense. ‘‘He was taking the place of somebody who could actually contribute to the public dialogue,’’ Clizbe told me. ‘‘I know people who could do it. I could do it.’’One of Clizbe’s specialties in the C.I.A. and in his post-agency career as an intelligence consultant was ‘‘deception detection.’’ He had even codified his method, which he calls the ‘‘holistic contextual credibility assessment system.’’ Clizbe doesn’t believe in polygraph machines and other standard lie-detection techniques. They function, he says, from the flawed assumption that people from all cultures have the same physical and psychological reactions when they lie. After all, famous American traitors like Aldrich Ames passed polygraphs while spying for the enemy. True deception detection requires a far deeper cultural immersion. ‘‘I am what Wayne was pretending to be,’’ he says. ‘‘He was stepping into my context. I’ve lived it, thought about it, pondered it academically and philosophically. Wayne never saw me coming.’’Still, there’s no number to call at the C.I.A. about that sort of business — no desk dedicated to fact-checking wild claims nor, for obvious reasons, any public access to the agency’s roster. The C.I.A. also has a policy against confirming or denying questions about employment. (The agency declined to comment on the Simmons prosecution, except to say that it is working closely with the Justice Department on the case.) There was also the simple difficulty of proving a negative. Clizbe had been an executive recruiter for clients in Silicon Valley for two years after he quit the C.I.A. in 1999, which taught him to approach such epistemological quandaries the other way around. ‘‘I never vetted a candidate by starting with the hypothesis that they weren’t qualified for a job,’’ he says. ‘‘I tried to prove that they were qualified. If the evidence proves that they aren’t, then I’ve falsified the hypothesis.’’He set out to see if he could prove that Simmons was a former C.I.A. employee. Running into old C.I.A. colleagues at the Raleigh Spy Conference or at meetings of the Association of Former Intelligence Officers or the C.I.A. Retirees Association, Clizbe folded his inquiries into conversations with dozens of former spooks. Who is this guy? Seen him around? Ever work with him? Know anybody who has? He was especially interested in those who had worked at the Crime and Narcotics Center (C.N.C.), which was the division of the C.I.A. that he figured Simmons claimed to be a part of. But none of the former agents, even from the C.N.C., remembered working with him or even hearing about him.By the spring of 2011, Clizbe was convinced that there was no way to confirm Simmons’s claims, so he reached out to his former boss, M., an irascible older man who had been a high-ranking Senior Intelligence Service officer. (He insisted on being identified only by his middle initial.) M. spent about 40 years with the C.I.A., both on the staff and as a contract worker, ascending to its highest ranks. He knew of Simmons — he consumed Fox News regularly — and had figured Simmons might have been an obscure contractor at the agency. Clizbe pointed out the irregularities in Simmons’s biography, and M. became convinced he was a fraud.M. alerted Paul Vallely, the retired two-star general who founded Stand Up America, an organization that promotes a conservative foreign-policy agenda through analysis on cable-news networks and talk radio. Vallely met Simmons through Fox News and invited him to serve on the Citizens’ Commission on Benghazi, a collection of military brass, C.I.A. officers and politicians determined to uncover the truth about the September 2012 embassy attack in Libya. M. remained suspicious when Vallely failed to respond after a month. (Vallely declined to comment for this article, citing Simmons’s coming trial.)M. also contacted Gary Berntsen, a decorated former C.I.A. counterterrorism officer and onetime Republican Senate candidate from New York. Berntsen made occasional appearances on Fox News and wasn’t surprised by M.’s message. ‘‘When I started doing television, senior agency guys were calling me on the phone and telling me: ‘That guy’s on television, he goes on the network you are on, he’s a fraud. Please tell them,’ ’’ Berntsen says. While waiting in the greenroom one day before going on Judge Jeanine’s show, Berntsen was approached by Col. David Hunt, a retired officer who had done special-operations work.‘‘ ‘Can I ask you something?’ ’’ Berntsen recalls Hunt saying. ‘‘ ‘This guy Wayne Simmons, is he a fraud?’‘‘Of course he’s a fraud,’’ Berntsen said he replied. ‘‘He’s a blithering idiot.’’According to Berntsen, Hunt said that he too had been suspicious of Simmons and intended to inform Bill Shine, a senior programming executive at the network. He suspected Fox would heed Hunt’s warning. (Hunt did not respond to requests for comment.) But then, one morning, Berntsen was at the network’s studios to make an appearance on a radio show, and he bumped into Simmons. He asked Simmons what division of the C.I.A. he had served in. ‘‘If you’re an agency officer, you know exactly what to say,’’ Berntsen told me. But Simmons’s response was, he said, ‘‘bloody [expletive] gibberish.’’Clizbe knew from his days as a case officer that the most potent deceptions contain a kernel of truth. He developed a theory about Simmons based on this insight. Maybe, he speculated, Simmons had been caught by some government agency on a drug charge and was recruited into working as a street asset. Simmons’s recruiters, whoever they may have been, ‘‘likely blew air up his butt’’ and mentioned the C.I.A. After that, he became a spy in his own mind.This assessment could be correct. Publicly available information on Simmons’s life after 1973, when he left the Navy, reveals a certain sort of aimlessness that doesn’t jibe with a career in the C.I.A. He worked as a headwaiter at Pisces, a nightclub in Georgetown, and as a manager for Making Waves, an adult-entertainment hot-tub complex in College Park, Md. He played semipro football for the Baltimore Eagles and, in 1978, was invited to try out with the New Orleans Saints. He played defensive back for them before being cut early in the season. In July 1980 he got into an argument with three men in a nightclub parking lot and shot at them with his 9 millimeter Walther — the sort of handgun James Bond carries. He pleaded guilty to assault and transporting a firearm and received probation.In 1983, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the F.B.I. received a tip that Simmons was looking to purchase large quantities of Uzis, grenades and surface-to-air missiles. Undercover agents began meeting with Simmons late at night, in an effort to draw him out. Simultaneously, the Prince George’s County Police Department vice squad learned of a bookmaking operation that Simmons ran out of the small house he shared with his wife and two young children. The police monitored his phone activity and, after gathering enough evidence for an arrest warrant, staged a raid. In addition to gambling paraphernalia, the authorities recovered an old handgun stashed in the garage and a rifle in Simmons’s bedroom. They also confiscated a safe. Simmons was charged with possession of firearms by a felon.When Simmons took the stand, an incredible story emerged. The prosecution revealed that Simmons was involved with a man named Tom Tindall, a pilot who had been caught by the United States Customs Service flying drugs into the country for the Patriarca crime family. Because Tindall decided to testify against the Boston-based organized-crime group, he had a contract on his head. Simmons claimed that the Patriarcas wanted him dead, too, simply because of his affiliation with Tindall. That, he said, was the reason for the rifle in his bedroom. As for the artillery he was looking to buy, Simmons claimed that was Tindall’s idea. The two were working undercover with Customs, buying weapons so they could infiltrate ‘‘anti-American forces’’ in South Florida and Central America. Simmons was found guilty, but his sentence was suspended and he was placed on five-year probation.In a post-trial motion to modify the conditions of Simmons’s release, the prosecutor mentioned the safe seized from Simmons’s bedroom. When law-enforcement officers opened the safe, they found a ledger that contained documentary ‘‘evidence of large-scale narcotics activity.’’ Simmons, however, never faced any drug charges. The safe was barely mentioned during his trial. Simmons claims today that the lenient sentence is proof that he was working for the C.I.A. He also claims he perjured himself to cover up for his C.I.A. work. To Clizbe, though, the outcome of the trial supports his theory: Simmons was an informant. Drug charges were never pursued, perhaps, in exchange for some sort of cooperation. (Simmons denies being an informant and dismissed the notion as ‘‘amateur speculation.’’)Clizbe’s theory seems plausible, but it was still missing some vital details. The typical informant doesn’t try his hand, let alone succeed, at conning his way into Pentagon public-relations programs. Clizbe eventually found what he thought was the missing piece: The 2012 obituary for Simmons’s wife, Corinne, a longtime military-hospital administrator, laid out the Simmons family tree, and further digging revealed that it was a remarkable lineage. Simmons’s father, Wayne Sr., joined the Navy on the day he turned 17 and was stationed at Pearl Harbor when the Japanese attacked. He served in the Pacific during the war and belonged to the Baltimore Masonic Lodge. His mother had been an F.B.I. fingerprint analyst. Simmons’s sister, Patricia Bradshaw, had been the deputy under secretary of defense for civilian personnel policy. Before that, she held a number of high-ranking positions in the Defense Department and the Department of the Navy. She was married to a former admiral. (Bradshaw didn’t respond to requests for comment.)Clizbe finally saw it: the black sheep of a distinguished family, disgraced with an arrest that put him in the hands of special agents. Clizbe imagined Simmons reading spy novels and watching movies, researching the history of the C.I.A., internalizing tradecraft. And then one day, he got a lucky break, finding his way onto Fox and into the Retired Military Analysts program. All of a sudden, he was eating lunch with Donald Rumsfeld at the Pentagon and making day trips to Guantánamo. He was living the life of the decorated patriot he was born to be.For two years, Clizbe and M. stewed as they watched Simmons ascend to greater fame. He and a co-author had released a novel, ‘‘The Natanz Directive,’’ about a retired black-ops agent who infiltrates Iran and single-handedly dismantles its nuclear program. (It has a blurb from Donald Rumsfeld: ‘‘Wayne Simmons doesn’t just write it. He’s lived it.’’) Simmons, who claims the tale is partly autobiographical, used the ensuing publicity push to advocate for a ground invasion of Iran.In late 2013, Clizbe and M. developed a plan to extract a confession from Simmons. Their method would be a good-cop/bad-cop interrogation, carried out where Simmons would least suspect it: on Facebook. M. left needling comments on Simmons’s page, questioning the validity of his claims. In a series of private messages beginning Dec. 1, M. called him a liar. Simmons shot back, accusing M. of being an Obama apologist. M. responded, ‘‘I agree with you politically (not an Obamatron), but . . . am convinced that your claim to be a former ‘operative’ is phony.’’Simmons noticed that Clizbe and M. were Facebook friends and suspected a connection, so he wrote to Clizbe in an effort to ward off further attacks: ‘‘My creds are impeccable. . . . Every Federal Agency in the US gov has been up my ass for 12 years.’’ Clizbe responded with a message that seemed friendly yet was still intended to push Simmons closer to an admission: ‘‘[M.] is about as wired into the C.I.A. as anyone living. If he’s criticizing something . . . it might be worth listening to. You’re welcome to reach out to him. He is not shy.’’ So Simmons turned back to M., again leaning on his work with the Pentagon: ‘‘BTW . . . I was sent by the SECDEF, Rumsfeld, to GITMO 3 times. My clearances were good on each trip.’’ M. had seen a flight manifest from one of those trips, showing Simmons listed as a former C.I.A. worker. M. knew that didn’t prove anything; Simmons most likely provided that description himself.The next morning, Simmons provided M. with a litany of his operations. He helped bring down the Patriarcas in Boston; he helped uncover an Iranian-American drug-smuggling ring; he orchestrated the recovery of a device stolen from a Scandinavian laboratory. He’d been all over the globe: Central America, South America, Geneva, Bimini, Islamorada, Hong Kong, Macau and Kazakhstan. M. reviewed the message, line by line. He may not have been aware of every operation the C.I.A. ran, but he knew what sort of work they did. And like Clizbe, he noticed the strange jurisdictional confusion in Simmons’s résumé as well as the suspicious diversity of tasks and locations. Despite its swashbuckling reputation, the C.I.A. is a highly bureaucratic organization, rife with procedures, regulations and paperwork. People like M. rise through the ranks because of their ability to work that bureaucracy to their advantage. The operations Simmons claimed to have carried out, if they were real, would have been well known around the higher levels of the directorate, and M. had never heard of any of them. Moreover, if Simmons had done half the things he claimed, the agency never would have agreed to lift his cover. They most likely would have sued him for writing ‘‘The Natanz Directive’’ or for appearing on Fox News at all.On the afternoon of Dec. 2, M. sent a note to a group of former senior C.I.A. officers whose careers would have made them familiar with the operations Simmons claimed to have worked. Nobody knew him or his supposed exploits. M. composed a stern warning to Simmons: ‘‘If you continue to promote yourself as a former agency ‘operative,’ we will have to expose you publicly as a poser and a fraud.’’ But he also offered him a way out: either to provide his full name and date of birth so that a friend of M.’s with access to the C.I.A.’s records could run his name, or to provide the name of a living C.I.A. officer who could vouch for him.And then, just like that, Simmons folded. He wouldn’t admit to having fabricated the operations on his résumé, but he was willing to entertain the idea that his bosses had been pretending to be C.I.A. — that he had been duped his entire career by some other outfit. ‘‘I will cede to your wishes,’’ he wrote. ‘‘You have my word that I will never personally hold myself out as C.I.A. again.’’Almost immediately, Clizbe pitched the story of this vetting operation to The Washington Times. The paper sent Simmons an email. Simmons replied, denying the accusations and claiming that he had run an ‘‘intel op’’ to expose the link that he suspected between Clizbe and M. (This was apparently a reference to their interactions on Facebook.) It was a bold move, but Simmons was a well-known media figure. Nobody knew who Clizbe and M. were. The Washington Times rejected Clizbe’s story.Clizbe had sent a draft to Simmons for comment, and as he tried to find another home for his article, Simmons offered a new and curious response. He categorically denied the accusations, which didn’t surprise Clizbe. But then he changed his story completely, claiming that for 27 years, he was a sort of officer known as a NOC (Nonofficial Cover). This is the deepest cover the C.I.A. provides. Rather than working out of an embassy, NOCs often maintain a plausible career — as energy consultants, for example — and if they are caught, the C.I.A. may deny their affiliation.M. thought this explanation was absurd. If Simmons had been a NOC for almost three decades, one of M.’s colleagues would have remembered his name. He began to alert Simmons’s media colleagues about his and Clizbe’s suspicion. One of them, a high-ranking military officer who worked as a paid contributor to Fox News, wrote: ‘‘I’ve had reservations for years. In my experience, some of the ‘programs’ he claims to have been a part of simply never existed. While he may have somehow been on the periphery of something, I’ve seen and heard nothing to convince me he was a NOC.’’ M. also notified Shine, the Fox senior programming executive; the Fox legal chief Dianne Brandi; and Neil Cavuto. Nobody wrote back to him. (These emails were obtained by The Times. Fox says Shine, Brandi and Cavuto have no record of receiving the emails.)After trying and failing to pitch his story elsewhere, Clizbe eventually gave up. He contacted a former senior official at the agency, who took Clizbe’s report to an assistant deputy director, close to the top of the chain. He had no idea if he would ever hear back.At 6:30 a.m. on Oct. 15, 2015, the F.B.I. knocked on Simmons’s door in Annapolis with an arrest warrant. He was told that for almost two years — since roughly the same time that Clizbe’s report was handed to the C.I.A. — he had been under investigation for fraud. In the court hearings that followed, the assistant United States attorney Paul Nathanson punctured Simmons’s public image with point-by-point allegations: He was never in the C.I.A. He hadn’t made a mortgage payment since 2010. His car had been repossessed. Simmons had been telling people that ‘‘The Natanz Directive’’ would be made into a movie in 2016, but in actuality, Nathanson explained, someone paid $1,250 for the option to make a movie from the book three years earlier, then renewed the option for the same price. Simmons’s only other source of income was periodic financial support from his sister, Patricia Bradshaw.In papers submitted by the prosecution, Simmons is said to have repeatedly tried to use his reputation as a C.I.A. veteran to find lucrative contracting work. In 2008, he managed to pass an interim security clearance and gain entry into the U.S. Army’s Human Terrain System program, which brought anthropologists into Afghanistan and Iraq to learn about local culture. Interim clearances are minimally invasive and granted on a temporary basis, pending the completion of a more intense background investigation. According to Simmons, he self-reported his criminal infractions, explaining them away as the collateral damage of a long, complicated career with the C.I.A. He went to training at Fort Leavenworth but was asked to resign before completing the program. Simmons says he resigned over a pay cut. The Army, however, cited unspecified performance problems.A manager of the Human Terrain System program told me that Simmons had found his way into the program through BAE Systems, a subcontractor that was struggling to meet personnel quotas. ‘‘Wayne was like a lot of folks taking advantage of the poor screening by the BAE recruiters to draw good pay during training and then cop out,’’ the manager told me. ‘‘We had a lot of this.’’ He described Simmons as ‘‘a mile wide’’ and ‘‘an inch deep.’’In 2009, the prosecution argues, Simmons made false statements on security-clearance forms in an effort to secure employment with the defense contractor Triple Canopy. This application led to a full background check by the State Department, which concluded that Simmons never worked for the C.I.A. in any capacity whatsoever. His top-secret clearance was denied. In 2010, he supposedly used another interim clearance to be hired as a senior intelligence adviser on NATO’s anti-insurgency team in Kabul. After a time, his clearance was revoked, and he was sent back to the United States.Simmons generally failed in his attempts to fleece the government, but he succeeded elsewhere. According to the prosecution, Simmons defrauded his former girlfriend, referred to in documents as E. L. (Simmons denies any romantic involvement.) She gave him $125,000 to invest in a real estate venture, and Simmons pocketed the money. (Simmons denies this, too.) Simmons’s trial is set to begin in May and, if he is found guilty, he could face decades in federal prison.The F.B.I. claims that the timing of Clizbe’s investigation and their own is coincidental, but Clizbe is skeptical. During the course of his inquiry, he talked to dozens of people, and any one of them could have sounded the alarm. Additionally, Clizbe said, he submitted his article to the C.I.A.’s Publications Review Board, which would have sent it to offices all around the agency and, potentially, to other federal agencies as well.After trying to publish his story about Simmons, Clizbe says, he was blacklisted by the conservative media. (When I asked Simmons about this claim, he grinned, shrugged and said, ‘‘I have powerful friends.’’) I asked Clizbe if exposing Simmons was worth the trouble it had brought him. He insisted that it was. ‘‘We cannot allow scum bags to take away honor and truth and change the meanings of those things,’’ he said. ‘‘It’s the fundamental basis of our society and culture.’’In the government’s extensive rap sheet on Simmons, the picture that emerges is not of a cynical fraudster but of a man living in a fiction of his own creation. The U.S. attorney’s office shared with me a particularly troubling police report from January 2007. Two police officers in Annapolis, Md., were called to Church Circle, right in the center of town, to break up a street fight. They arrived to find Syed Mohammed Azizur-Rehman, a 53-year-old taxi driver, lying face down on the street; nearby, they found Simmons screaming, ‘‘He has a bomb!’’ Simmons claimed that during a ride in Azizur-Rehman’s cab, the driver started ranting about his hatred of America and announced that he had a bomb in the trunk. After grabbing his cellphone, which Simmons believed to be the detonator, he forced Azizur-Rehman to stop the car and subdued him. He was a former C.I.A. officer, he told the Annapolis Police, and he advised them to call the White House or Fox News to vouch for him.A crowd assembled. Bomb dogs were called in. The driver, meanwhile, explained his side of the story. He picked up Simmons at a downtown steakhouse. Simmons hopped in, handed him a $20 bill and told him to just drive; he wouldn’t say where he wanted to go. Once they reached Church Circle, with seemingly no explanation, Simmons grabbed the driver’s cellphone and ordered him to stop the car. Simmons pulled Azizur-Rehman out of the car and started kicking him.Needless to say, a bomb-sniffing dog failed to find any explosive devices in the car. At the local precinct, the police called the C.I.A. and spoke to a supervisor, who advised them to ‘‘take appropriate action’’ — whatever that meant. They called Corinne Simmons, and she told them Wayne was depressed and was supposed to be at a support group for retired government employees the previous day, but it had been canceled. Simmons was taken to the hospital for observation. No charges were ever filed. (Simmons now blames drinking and PTSD for the episode.)After some coaxing, Simmons agreed to let me visit him during his house arrest awaiting trial. After the October indictment, the Citizens’ Committee on Benghazi removed Simmons from its roster. Fox News stopped calling the previous spring. Neil Cavuto issued an on-air apology after the arrest. ‘‘If it’s true that all our due diligence and vetting on Mr. Simmons missed this, that’s big, and that’s on me,’’ he said. ‘‘And only me.’’Simmons answered the door in gray wool slacks, a pressed navy blue shirt and blue boat shoes. At 62, he remains physically imposing and still moves with an athlete’s grace, something he has retained, he said, through regular krav maga, the Israeli self-defense system. The rooms in his ornately decorated home are painted pink, burgundy and teal. He hadn’t changed a thing since Corinne died in 2012, he said. He had a Rottweiler named Brutus and two irresistible Maltipoos. His shelves were covered in patriotic bric-a-brac: presidential biographies, flags and awards earned by his son, a civil servant. (His daughter, who is active in local politics, does his shopping.) On a ledge sat a signed note from Rumsfeld, thanking Simmons for some cigars, and next to it, an autographed photo of Ronald Reagan and a glossy of a gleeful handshake Simmons shared with President George W. Bush in 2006.We sat down at the kitchen table, and he produced a black binder, stuffed with documents. He began to unspool his current version of events: He dropped out of Jacksonville State to join the Navy. His service lasted less than two months before he was given a medical discharge for post-concussion syndrome. The diagnosis was phony, however: a ruse to separate from the Navy and join the C.I.A. But he wasn’t recruited to be an officer, he said. He didn’t go to ‘‘the Farm,’’ the C.I.A.’s famous training facility near Williamsburg, Va. Instead, he shipped off to Alaska and got a job with Mukluk Freight Lines — perfect cover. He would work four weeks and then take off to Fort Wainwright to learn tradecraft. He flipped to a printout of the Wikipedia entry on MK Ultra, the notorious C.I.A. mind-control program, and told me he was subjected to similar sorts of experiments there.The reason Clizbe and M. found his résumé bizarre, he said, is that he was part of an off-the-books outfit authorized to do whatever was needed, wherever it was needed. Simmons was a saboteur, specialized in infiltrating criminal organizations or terror groups and dismantling them from the inside by inciting violence between rivals. He insinuated that he killed foreign nationals on American soil. His weapons convictions and several D.U.I.s were proof of how far outside the law he operated: Before his arrest in October, he’d never spent a day in jail, he says.He showed me snapshots of buildings that he said were safe houses. Each one was accompanied by a map, their locations marked with a black X. I told him those didn’t prove anything about the C.I.A.; they were just photographs of vacation cottages. He shut his binder and held it up in the air for me to ponder. ‘‘Alex, you don’t just wake up one morning and make this from nothing,’’ he said. ‘‘If it appears I lived this life, it’s because I did.’’He flipped to a binder tab marked ‘‘Businesses.’’ He showed me articles of incorporation for consulting firms bearing opaque names like WSS International and Phoenix Management. There was Regal Limousine, which had just one car in its fleet. These were agency fronts, he claimed. ‘‘The C.I.A. spent millions to make sure no one can see me,’’ he said.He dropped name after name, putting himself in the middle of real events that I later found news clippings about: the massive heroin bust in Washington that took down that Iranian smuggling ring, for instance. But I was never able to independently confirm his involvement in any of the events he mentioned. He vowed to send me corroborating documents but never delivered them. He promised to introduce me to former colleagues and lawyers who would verify his stories, but those offers always fell to the side.I questioned Simmons on his credentials, and he fell back, as he did with others, on his trips to Gitmo. ‘‘We rode down on Air Force Two,’’ he said. He produced a photograph taken on the runway. ‘‘I don’t care who you are, you don’t get on Air Force Two unless your credentials are legit.’’ (Allison Barber, who ran the Retired Military Analysts program, says the group never flew to Cuba on the vice president’s plane during her tenure, which overlapped with Simmons’s.) He pulled out a photo of him standing nose to nose with President Bush. ‘‘Who did the background checks on me then? Every time we went to White House or the Pentagon, they ran a background check.’’ I knew that his service in the Retired Military Analysts program didn’t require anything more than a cursory check to make sure he wasn’t on any watch lists and that a visit to the White House required only his name on the guest list and a name check.Simmons was quick to point out that the F.B.I. banged on his door just a few days before Hillary Clinton’s congressional testimony about Benghazi. He told me his legal problems were an Obama administration ploy, a craven attempt to punish him for his opinions and to discredit the Citizens’ Commission on Benghazi. He removed his glasses and rubbed his eyes. ‘‘I wish I was this smart,’’ he said, chuckling. ‘‘Nobody can do what the government says I did, fooling the F.B.I., C.I.A., D.O.D. and I.R.S. If I’m that good, they should erect a plaque for me. Are you kidding me? I’ve fooled the most powerful divisions of most powerful nation of the world?’’Simmons said there were documents that he’d scattered around the world, files that detailed the unimaginable things he did. They would ultimately set him free, he said. ‘‘The C.I.A. knows what else I did for them,’’ he said. ‘‘It’s the royal straight flush of spades.’’ His vindication was coming soon, he promised. Any day.Alex French is a writer based in Monmouth County, N.J. He has also written for GQ, New York magazine, Wired and ‘‘This American Life,’’ and he is the author of ‘‘The Killing Season.’’Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement