https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/26/books/review/freshwater-akwaeke-emezi.html
In This Debut Novel, a College Student Hears Voices - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2152
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Tariro MzezewaFRESHWATER By Akwaeke Emezi 226 pp. Grove Atlantic. $24In her remarkable and daring debut novel, “Freshwater,” Akwaeke Emezi draws in part from her own life to tell the story of Ada, a young Igbo and Tamil woman haunted by the ogbanje — the “godly parasite with many heads, roaring inside the marble room of her mind.”The story is narrated by Ada’s multiple personalities, and occasionally by Ada herself. Early in the novel, we learn of Ada’s untamable screaming as a baby in Nigeria and in Malaysia, where her childhood nightmares send her to stand at her parents’ bedside until they rise and tend to her. Later, to feed the ogbanje, she develops a compulsion to cut herself. But it isn’t until Ada arrives in the United States as a college student that the spirits and personalities inhabiting her come fully to life.The most forceful and uncontrollable of these personalities, Asughara, is unleashed after Ada is sexually assaulted on a Virginia campus. “Ada wasn’t there any more. At all, at all. She wasn’t even a small thing curled up in the corner of her marble. There was only me. I expanded against the walls, filling it up and blocking her out completely.” Asughara persuades Ada to chop off her long black hair and abstain from eating until she is frail, and also encourages her to have sex with a friend’s two brothers, among other men. Asughara breaks the hearts of people Ada cares about and intentionally breaks up her tumultuous marriage.We are later introduced to Saint Vincent, a gentler personality who prefers to “move in Ada’s dreams.” But it is Asughara who forces Ada’s rational self ever further into the background and takes over her body more than any other personality.“Freshwater” is a poetic and disturbing depiction of mental illness as it haunts the protagonist from birth to adulthood: “the brief insanities that are in you, not just the ones that blossomed as you grew taller … but the ones you were born with, tucked behind your liver.” It is an unflinching account of the way mental illness can grow, transform and destroy not just relationships, but one’s sense of self as well. Unlike many depictions of dissociative identity disorder in fiction, Emezi steers clears of hysteria and fear-driven drama. The voices in Ada’s mind build creatively on a consistent belief about madness: that in the height of suffering, sufferers are not themselves; they become possessed by different spirits. As Sylvia Plath famously wrote in 1962, “I am terrified by this dark thing that sleeps in me.”Ada’s voices don’t just talk to her; they fight with her during the novel’s narration in a moving portrayal of a struggle against something that exists within, a mental anguish that no amount of reasoning can conquer. More powerful than Emezi’s prose, though, is what it brings to the real world. Eating disorders, cutting, depression, suicide, manic depression — in the popular imagination, all these things are most often seen as the struggles of young, wealthy, white American women. This novel expands the universe of mental illness to include women of color and other ethnicities. Rooting Ada’s story in Igbo cosmology forces us to further question our paradigm for what causes mental illness and how it manifests. It causes us to question science and reason.“Freshwater” builds slowly, but that only crystallizes how fractured Ada and her personalities are. As the voices in her head get louder and grow hungrier, the story gains momentum. Only when Ada looks to her roots is there hope that she will wrest back control from her tormentors. For both the reader and Ada, that comes as a revelation, if not quite a relief.Tariro Mzezewa is a staff editor for The Times.Advertisement