https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/29/us/politics/kavanaugh-blasey-metoo-supreme-court.html
Kavanaugh Battle Shows the Power, and the Limits, of #MeToo Movement - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1154
AdvertisementSupported byBy Kate Zernike and Emily SteelOne of the first stories Gretchen Carlson covered in her career as a television journalist was the 1991 Senate hearing where Anita Hill sat alone at the witness table and testified that Clarence Thomas had sexually harassed her. Then, Ms. Carlson said, “I was promptly harassed on the job.”But it wasn’t for another 25 years that she would file her explosive sexual harassment lawsuit against Roger Ailes, the powerful founding chairman of Fox News. Ms. Carlson, too, was largely alone; it was July 2016, more than a year before the #MeToo movement would erupt, and even some female colleagues at her own network questioned her actions. While she won a $20 million settlement, Mr. Ailes left the network with a $40 million payout.As she watched this week as another Supreme Court nominee faced sexual assault allegations — this time from a woman supported by sexual assault survivors and female senators sitting behind her — Ms. Carlson could not help seeing the effects of the revolution she helped start, and its limits.“We’ve made such great strides with regard to the fact that women coming forward now are given a platform to tell their story,” she said. “That would have never happened before. But we are still in the ‘he said, she said.’”The next week may not reveal conclusively whether the nominee, Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, sexually assaulted Christine Blasey Ford when they were teenagers, as she claims and he denies. The Judiciary Committee on Friday agreed to a one-week supplemental background check into Judge Kavanaugh by the F.B.I.But with all of its emotion and anger — and even the Republicans’ last-minute forced reversal on the background check — the fight over his nomination shows how the dynamics of the #MeToo movement have begun to thread their way into American life.And depending on what the F.B.I. finds and how the Senate responds, it could serve as the test case for the power of the #MeToo movement.“Do I think that Christine would have ever been able to have the voice that she did without this movement we are in? No,” Ms. Carlson said. “But as a nation, we still have a lot of work to do.”There is no question the effects of the movement have been uneven. While allegations of sexual misconduct have cut a swath through the upper reaches of industries like the media and entertainment, politics has been more forgiving for some — beginning with President Trump, who remains enormously popular with Republicans despite multiple accusations of sexual assault and his own admission caught on tape.Still, the emergence of Dr. Blasey and the reaction on all sides show how pivotal the movement has become. While Dr. Blasey came forward reluctantly with decades-old claims, she was immediately embraced and supported by #MeToo activists and women across the country. The Republican men who run the Senate Judiciary Committee — two of whom remain from the time Ms. Hill appeared 27 years ago — were careful to publicly show her deference.And when Judge Kavanaugh came before the committee to forcefully deny the allegations, one of the themes of his tearful rant was that Dr. Blasey’s account threatened to turn him into one of those once-powerful men cut down by an accusation from the past, uncorroborated by eyewitnesses. He lamented that he might lose his ability to coach his daughters’ basketball team and teach at Harvard, not to mention his chance to serve on the Supreme Court .It was as if the accusations and recriminations that have played out in workplaces across the country over the last year were now elevated to a bigger stage — hearings broadcast on national television, with the nation’s leaders engaged in the tug of war over who gets to speak and who is heard.Dr. Blasey testified that the memory that had traumatized her repeatedly over the years was one of forced silence: Judge Kavanaugh, a 17-year-old high school athlete, putting his hand over her mouth to muffle her screams for help as he pinned her to a bed and assaulted her.Democrat after Democrat on the panel thanked Dr. Blasey for her bravery in speaking up now, saying her courage had inspired other women to come forward to tell of their long-silenced terrors.During Judge Kavanaugh’s testimony, he interrupted Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, a Democrat who ran for her office because she was appalled at how Ms. Hill was diminished by an all-male judiciary panel. He responded to a question about his drinking habits from Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota by defiantly turning it on her: Had she ever blacked out from drinking too much? (He later apologized to her.)After a year of male leaders talking about the need to listen to the nation’s daughters, sisters and wives, he demanded that the senators think of men. “I ask you to judge me by the standard that you would want applied to your father. Your husband. Your brother. Or your son,” he said, his face twisted in pain.Republicans, aware of the lessons of the Anita Hill hearing, and with the midterm elections just six weeks away, had hired a female sex crimes prosecutor to ask questions for them, producing an unusual image of white men in suits sitting silently behind a woman leading the questioning. But they soon sidelined her in frustration and began to ask their own questions. In essence: Was one woman’s account going to be the knockout blow that ruins a man’s life, an account of a furtive moment so long ago?Senator Lindsey Graham pleaded for proportionality of punishment, pointing out that Judge Kavanaugh was not Bill Cosby.“I know I’m a single white man from South Carolina and I’ve been told to shut up, but I will not shut up,” Mr. Graham told his colleagues as they gathered to vote on the nomination Friday morning.Seeing men claim themselves as victims “is turning #MeToo on its head,” said Nancy Erika Smith, a lawyer who represented Ms. Carlson and other women in sexual harassment suits.Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, a New York Democrat who was the first to call for the resignation of Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota, over accusations of sexual misconduct, called the hearing a “very dark moment” for women.“They saw men in power who were believing other men in power over women who suffered gravely,” she said in an interview. “They saw that disbelief and dismissiveness of women and they felt disbelieved and dismissed themselves.”Judge Kavanaugh, she said, is very much a part of the male power structure that was being challenged. “His defense was, ‘I am powerful, I am successful and I should be allowed to complete my career path by serving on the Supreme Court,” she said.Asked about his drinking or yearbook boasts of sexual conquests, Ms. Gillibrand said, “His response was: Look at my résumé. I have bigger fish to fry than dealing with what I said about women and my own behavior in high school and the relevant period when she says he sexually assaulted her.”Still, Ms. Gillibrand said she was sitting behind Dr. Blasey in the hearing and watching Senator Jeff Flake, the Arizona Republican who made his vote to advance Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination conditional on having the F.B.I. investigate.“He was listening,” Ms. Gillibrand said. “He’s been listening.”The moment may be particular to Washington, and the bitter divides in the Senate, where Democrats are angry at Republicans for refusing to hold hearings for Merrick B. Garland, President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court nominee.On the campaign trail, by contrast, female candidates are coming forward to assert themselves as survivors of sexual misconduct. Many are winning, and polling has shown that a majority of voters cast doubt on candidates who say the #MeToo movement has gone too far.Institutions have been slow to change. But women who have brought charges of sexual misconduct say that as more women come forward, they inevitably will.“The limits are about actual real power,” said Ms. Smith, the lawyer. “Unless women really do take power in the legislature, in courts, in C-suites, in every aspect of life, unless we demand and take our share, nothing will ever, ever change. They are not going to give it to us. We have to take it.”Advertisement