https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/13/dining/i-sodi-restaurant-review.html
The Laws of Tuscan Eating at I Sodi in the West Village - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2081
AdvertisementSupported byRestaurant Review10 PhotosView Slide Show ›When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Pete WellsMedium-rare is how I ordered my tagliata, a grilled sirloin that is, like almost everything else at I Sodi, prepared the way it would be in Tuscany. Right away I changed my mind and asked for it rare. I wanted the sliding smoothness of nearly raw beef.The server thought I had it right the first time. “We cook the steak on the lighter side,” he said. “Medium-rare here is like rare in the rest of America.”Although it has been in business on one of Christopher Street’s less rollicking blocks for eight years now, I Sodi seems not to have fully assimilated into the United States. It exists in its own extraterritorial jurisdiction, like the headquarters of the United Nations. To eat there is to abide by the laws of eating that Rita Sodi, the chef and owner, brought with her from the farm north of Florence where she was raised.These private laws dictate a menu that is rigidly Tuscan. In its only previous review in The New York Times, an unstarred notice in 2008, Julia Moskin reported that I Sodi offered one risotto, two pastas, three main courses and “a couple of salads.” The menu has grown since then, but it has not wandered into other regions of Italy. And if you are inclined to pop your head into the kitchen to ask for fettuccine Alfredo topped with grilled shrimp, you may want to make sure that Ms. Sodi does not have a knife in her hand.The laws also require cooking that is mercilessly yoked to the season. When artichokes are good, they will appear on the menu under antipasti (sliced into a clean and guileless salad of pale, papery shavings that squeak between your teeth, dressed with shards of Parmigiano-Reggiano and a peppery young olive oil); contorni (fried until their young leaves are curled, crisp and bronze); and primi (layered with béchamel into a green lasagna, as plump and yielding as a featherbed, with so many thin and tender pasta sheets that I have never been able count them all, though I should say that I am usually preoccupied with eating them).Above all, the laws demand that Ms. Sodi dedicate herself so thoroughly to the Tuscan ways of stewing meat sauce, crimping ravioli or squashing Cornish game hens under an iron weight that her own ideas almost completely disappear. She does have ideas, of course. But they do not scream for attention, and neither does she. In her cooking, her ego disappears into her pride in where she comes from.This, along with the slightness of her opening menu and some early trial and error, may be why Ms. Sodi waited so long for recognition. A small squall of publicity finally rained down on her in 2014, when she opened Via Carota with the chef Jody Williams. (The two were married last year.) But I Sodi is still known, by the New Yorkers who know it at all, more as a neighborhood beacon than as a chef’s turn in the spotlight.The current food scene rewards egotistic gestures of novel techniques or ingredient pairings above rigorous devotion to tradition like Ms. Sodi’s. But there can’t be any doubt that she is one of the city’s great pasta practitioners when you eat I Sodi’s square little chestnut-filled chestnut-flour tortelli in a sauce of butter and grated cheese, or butter-slicked ravioli stuffed with ricotta and spinach under fried sage leaves, or spaghetti cacio e pepe, noodles that twirl up into your mouth with a wiggle, carrying a black-pepper bite that lingers on and on.In I Sodi’s kitchen, main ingredients are prohibited from hiding. Chicken is fried inside the thinnest shroud of crust imaginable, one that fuses with the skin into crunch without substance. The baked branzino is sweet, dense, naked except for olive oil; it doesn’t need even a drop of lemon juice. I used to believe that beef tartare needed to be blasted with lightning bolts of salt, mustard and other seasonings until I heaped some of I Sodi’s on a long slice of grilled bread. It tasted like raw beef — filet mignon in firm pieces the size of a blueberry — and extra-virgin olive oil. It did not taste salty, although it must contain salt. Salt is allowed to hide.Sugar is, too. This makes some desserts more implacable than they should be, like the crostata spread with a layer of orange marmalade so thin that viewed from the side it would disappear. But it’s nice to have the natural sweetness of cream and milk in the panna cotta left mostly alone.As for the laws governing customers at I Sodi, they are lenient.If you want to eat at one of the eight or so tables that are draped in white cloths, make a reservation. If you want to eat on one of the 16 backless leather seats at the bar, show up early. The dining room is spartan, tight, untheatrical and almost always packed.According to some stalkers of Italian flavor, you should stay away from I Sodi’s risotto, for which other regions are better known than Tuscany. Certainly the underseasoned and gummy mushroom risotto I left on my plate recently couldn’t compete with any of Ms. Sodi’s pastas.There is no penalty if you don’t drink one of the seven Negroni variations, only rewards if you do. Drinking two, at $13 to $15 each, will be cheaper than a bottle of wine. There are some real treats on the list, many from exactly the region you’d expect, but very few cost less than $70. It is the only aspect of the restaurant that makes me wish Ms. Sodi were more willing to compromise.An earlier version of this article misstated the chef Rita Sodi’s role at I Sodi. She is the sole owner, not a part owner.When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.This information was last updated on Nov. 17, 2018Reservations powered by Resyemail: petewells@nytimes.com. And follow Pete Wells on Twitter: @pete_wells.Advertisement