https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/10/opinion/william-barr-trump-roy-cohn.html
Opinion | Will William Barr Be Trump’s Roy Cohn? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
992
AdvertisementSupported byThe president wants an attorney general who will defend him above all else. There’s reason to worry about his new nominee.By Caroline FredricksonMs. Fredrickson is the president of the American Constitution Society.One of Donald Trump’s more dubious constitutional notions is that the attorney general serves to protect the president, rather than serving as a lawyer for the American people. He fired the office’s previous holder, Jeff Sessions, for failing to provide him personal legal cover in the Russia investigation. Now he has selected William Barr as Mr. Sessions’ replacement, and one is compelled to ask exactly what President Trump will expect from his new nominee. Because Mr. Barr previously served as attorney general, under George H.W. Bush, many observers assume the Senate might give him an easy confirmation. In fact, it should do the exact opposite.“Where’s my Roy Cohn?” That’s the phrase attributed to President Trump at the tail end of a reported presidential rant about Mr. Sessions’ decision to recuse himself from overseeing the Russia investigation. Cohn, a top aide to Senator Joseph McCarthy, was Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer and fixer throughout the 1970s, a man with a reputation for pushing legal limits and employing all manner of dirty tricks to protect his client; he ran afoul of the law himself, resulting in his disbarment in 1986. Mr. Trump’s contempt for Mr. Sessions centered around his recusal and unwillingness to shield the president from the Russia investigation. In longing for a Roy Cohn replica, the president made clear that he was seeking not a skilled and experienced attorney who would help him navigate choppy legal waters but rather a legal bruiser who would stop at nothing to protect him from scrutiny. It is no stretch to think that the ability of the next attorney general to do just that might have been on the president’s mind when making his selection. Matthew Whitaker, the president’s pick to serve as acting attorney general, had made clear his contempt for the special counsel, Robert Mueller. There are reasons to fear that Mr. Barr was selected using the same criteria and that he too shares the president’s disdain for the Russia investigation.Indeed, in 2017 Mr. Trump and Mr. Barr, then in private practice, reportedly discussed the possibility of Mr. Barr serving as Mr. Trump’s private defense attorney. While no engagement resulted, it will be important to understand how far those discussions advanced and to what extent sensitive information about the Russia inquiry was exchanged.Further, Mr. Barr has made statements in the past downplaying the looming charges against the president. And he has said that the president “made the right call” when he fired the former F.B.I. director, James Comey, a legally perilous decision, now that the president himself has said that the Russia investigation was on his mind when he made that move. Mr. Barr was also a key voice in President George H.W. Bush’s ear in 1992 when he pardoned several figures involved in the Iran-contra affair, directly undermining the special counsel charged with that investigation (coincidentally, at the time Mr. Mueller was the head of the Justice Department’s criminal division, and thus reported to Mr. Barr). We should be doubly worried about Mr. Barr’s nomination in the wake of the elevation of Brett Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court — both men apparently hold expansive views of presidential power, especially with regard to legal investigations of the executive branch.And last, Mr. Barr has signaled that he believes there is more to investigate with regard to  Hillary and Bill Clinton, specifically the long-debunked conspiratorial notion that international donations to the Clinton Foundation led Mrs. Clinton to “approve” the Uranium One deal while she was secretary of state. President Trump has repeatedly flouted the independence of the Justice Department by calling for an investigation of his long-vanquished 2016 election foe; has he finally found an attorney general nominee who might go down that path?These are perilous times. Not since Watergate have we seen a presidency so mired in accusations of unethical and illegal behavior. And not since Watergate have we seen a president so contemptuous of the rule of law. There are serious and credible allegations against the president, members of his inner circle and his campaign staff. Already the Russia investigation has led to criminal charges against 36 people and entities, seven guilty pleas, three people being sentenced and one convicted at trial. And there is undoubtedly more to come.During Mr. Barr’s confirmation hearings, senators must secure from him a firm commitment to allow the Russia investigation to continue. They must also get his assurances that Mr. Mueller’s conclusions will receive a full public airing. Mr. Barr must prove his independence from the president and his willingness to hold him accountable. Failure to do so would render him unqualified for the role of the nation’s top law enforcement officer.Caroline Fredrickson (@crfredrickson) is the president of the American Constitution Society and author of “Under the Bus: How Working Women Are Being Run Over” and the forthcoming “The Democracy Fix: How to Win the Fight for Fair Rules, Fair Courts and Fair Elections.”Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement