http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/16/us/politics/bill-clinton-concedes-his-crime-law-jailed-too-many-for-too-long.html
Bill Clinton Concedes His Crime Law Jailed Too Many for Too Long - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1042
AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter BakerWASHINGTON — Former President Bill Clinton on Wednesday disavowed part of the anti-crime legislation that he long considered one of his top accomplishments, concluding that it went too far in sending even minor criminals to prison “for way too long.”Addressing a convention of the N.A.A.C.P. a day after President Obama called for a wholesale overhaul of the criminal justice system, Mr. Clinton embraced the idea. He agreed that the law he enacted in 1994 played a significant part in warping sentencing standards and leading to an era of mass incarceration.“I signed a bill that made the problem worse,” Mr. Clinton said. “And I want to admit it.”The expression of regret was the latest effort by Mr. Clinton to reframe his record nearly 15 years after he left office and clear the way for his wife’s own campaign for the White House. Mr. Clinton has previously renounced the Defense of Marriage Act that he signed, defining marriage as the union of a man and woman, and the don’t-ask, don’t-tell policy that barred gays and lesbians from serving openly in the military.While tougher sentences and traditional marriage were popular stances in the 1990s, the political winds have shifted today. Former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, now the front-runner for the Democratic nomination next year, has embraced same-sex marriage and called for an end to the “incarceration generation.” She has also questioned the value of the North American Free Trade Agreement, another of her husband’s central achievements.When Mr. Clinton came to office, crime was perceived as a crisis and a major issue with voters that had put Democrats on the defensive for a generation. Expressing a centrist philosophy, Mr. Clinton sought to recalibrate his party by enacting tough-on-crime legislation, and he worked out a compromise with Republicans that incorporated his own priorities as well as some of theirs. In the end, crime rates came down and an issue that had hurt Democrats was neutralized.The law Mr. Clinton signed in 1994 committed to putting 100,000 more police officers on the street, banned certain assault rifles, enacted background checks for many gun purchases and increased resources to fight violence against women.“But in that bill, there were longer sentences,” Mr. Clinton told the N.A.A.C.P. gathering in Philadelphia. “And most of these people are in prison under state law, but the federal law set a trend. And that was overdone. We were wrong about that.”Mr. Clinton explained the context in which he acted. “When I took office, we had had a roaring decade of rising crime,” he said. “We had gang warfare on the streets. We had little children being shot dead on the streets who were just innocent bystanders standing in the wrong place. We had kids in Los Angeles doing drills in their schools to learn how to drop down and get under their desks because of people just doing random drive-by shootings.”The legislation, he said, played a role in curbing that wave of street violence. “The good news is we had the biggest drop in crime history and the first eight-year decline in crime in history,” he said. “The bad news is we had a lot of people who were essentially locked up who were minor actors for way too long.”In a book published earlier this year that advocated changes to the criminal justice system, Mr. Clinton wrote that “we have overshot the mark” in locking up too many low-level criminals, but he did not discuss his own legislation at length.More than 2.2 million people are now behind bars, nearly double the number incarcerated when Mr. Clinton took office. Although the United States makes up less than 5 percent of the world’s population, it has more than 20 percent of its prison population.In recent times, conservatives and liberals have concluded that this should be scaled back, and have come together to work on proposals to change the system. Many of Mrs. Clinton’s would-be Republican opponents have outlined their own ideas for reducing the imprisonment of nonviolent offenders, and lawmakers are collaborating on bipartisan legislation.In his own speech to the N.A.A.C.P. on Tuesday, Mr. Obama did not mention Mr. Clinton, but he made clear his belief that the imprisonment of a generation of young men, especially Hispanics and African-Americans, had become a moral and financial burden on the United States.He proposed a sweeping set of changes, including pouring more money into education and other programs to prevent disadvantaged youth from getting in trouble in the first place; improving conditions in prisons; reducing sentences for nonviolent drug offenses; making it easier for released convicts to get jobs; and allowing those who have served their sentences to vote.Mr. Obama flew on Wednesday to Oklahoma, where on Thursday he will be the first sitting president to visit a federal prison to showcase his interest in revamping the culture of incarceration.Follow The New York Times Politics and Washington on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.videoAdvertisement