https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/27/us/politics/kavanaugh-hearings-dr-ford.html
Updates From the Riveting Testimonies of Christine Blasey Ford and Brett Kavanaugh - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2621
AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York Times• Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, President Trump’s Supreme Court nominee, came out swinging in the early moments of his testimony to senators, saying, “This confirmation process has become a national disgrace.”• Christine Blasey Ford said she was “terrified” but delivered powerful testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee about her accusation that Judge Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her.• Immediately after the hearing adjourned, President Trump tweeted that “Judge Kavanaugh showed America exactly why I nominated him.”• Senator Lindsey Graham exploded across the dais in an outburst unusual even for a highly partisan body. “What you want to do is destroy this guy’s life, hold this seat open and hope you win in 2020,” he said.• Republicans deferred their questioning time of Dr. Blasey to a veteran prosecutor, Rachel Mitchell. Democrats used their questions to make broad points about the integrity of Republicans’ investigation, the treatment of the victims of sexual violence in the United States and Dr. Blasey in particular.After riveting testimony from Dr. Blasey, Judge Kavanaugh took his turn before the Senate Judiciary Committee to proclaim his innocence — and outrage.He opened the second half of the high-stakes hearing with a scorched-earth defense, denying he had ever sexually assaulted someone and denouncing a “frenzy” bent on destroying his nomination.“This confirmation process has become a national disgrace,” he said in an opening statement that he said he wrote himself on Wednesday. “The Constitution gives the Senate an important role in the confirmation process, but you have replaced ‘advice and consent’ with ‘search and destroy.’”[Read Brett Kavanaugh’s opening statement.]He condemned Democrats who he said had searched for reasons to sink him weeks before, only to turn to dark accusations. He pointed back at deep-seated liberal grudges, going back to the presidency of Bill Clinton and the victory of Mr. Trump as evidence of the animus. And he warned of dire consequences for the federal judiciary in decades ahead if nominees face a path like his.And when he recounted his daughters praying last night for Dr. Blasey, he broke down in tears.“My family and my name have been totally and permanently destroyed by vicious and false additional allegations,” he told the committee. But he vowed never to withdraw.“You may defeat me in the final vote, but you will never get me to quit,” he said. “Never.”On Wednesday, Mr. Trump said that he was going to be paying close attention to the committee’s proceedings and indicated that he was still willing to jettison Judge Kavanaugh if Thursday’s hearing did not go well.“They’re giving the women a major chance to speak,” Mr. Trump said at a news conference at the United Nations. “Now, it’s possible I’ll hear that and I’ll say, ‘Hey, I’m changing my mind.’”“I can always be convinced,” the president said shortly after.President Trump did not wait long to announce his opinion about Judge Kavanaugh’s perfomance. Immediately after the hearing adjourned, President Trump tweeted:After sitting back all day while Ms. Mitchell questioned the witness, one Republican, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, exploded across the dais late on Thursday in an outburst unusual even for a highly partisan body.“Boy, you all want power,” he said, rising in his seat. “God, I hope you never get it. I hope the American people can see through this sham that you knew about it and you held it. You had no intention of protecting Dr. Ford. None. She’s as much of a victim as you.”Mr. Graham accused Democrats of trying to paint Judge Kavanaugh as “Bill Cosby when you’re a junior and senior in high school.” He said they were executing a cynical political ploy to deny Mr. Trump a Supreme Court seat — “the most unethical sham since I’ve been in politics.” And he said if they really wanted to get to the truth, Democrats would have come forward with Dr. Blasey’s account weeks before.“What you want to do is destroy this guy’s life, hold this seat open and hope you win in 2020,” he said.Dr. Blasey delivered her opening statement, at times through tears, at times resolute — but always with palpable emotion.[Read Dr. Blasey’s prepared opening statement here.]Speaking her first words in public, Dr. Blasey told senators in explicit detail, her voice breaking at times, of the night she said the future Judge Kavanaugh pinned her to the bed, tried to rip her clothes off and clapped his hand over her mouth as she screamed.“It was hard for me to breathe and I believed that Brett was going to accidentally kill me,” she said.Dr. Blasey also described the lasting impact of the attack, especially how he held his hand over her mouth: “Brett’s assault on me drastically altered my life.”And today, she said death threats and vile epithets have “rocked me to my core.”The main test for Dr. Blasey was whether she could appear credible before the senators, especially Republicans who have suggested that she is suffering from a case of mistaken identity — or that she has partisan motives.She addressed the latter issue directly.“I have been accused of acting out of partisan political motives,” she said. “Those who say that do not know me. I am a fiercely independent person, and I am no one’s pawn. My motivation in coming forward was to provide the facts about how Mr. Kavanaugh’s actions have damaged my life, so that you can take that into serious consideration as you make your decision about how to proceed.”[Her performance prompted an outpouring of support through GoFundMe campaigns.]She also poked holes in the mistaken identity theory when she described how she and Judge Kavanaugh met when their social circles intersected. She remembered his friends, including Mark Judge, who she said was in the room, while practicing swimming and diving at Columbia Country Club in suburban Maryland.“This is how I met Brett Kavanaugh, the boy who eventually assaulted me,” she said.Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, when asked if he found Dr. Blasey credible, answered: “Let me suggest this. I know that we’ve got to take what she says very seriously.”— Sheryl Gay StolbergSenator Lindsey Graham:“To my Republican colleagues, if you vote no, you’re legitimizing the most despicable thing I have seen in my time in politics.”“I hate to say it because these have been my friends. But let me tell you, when it comes to this, you’re looking for a fair process, you came to the wrong town at the wrong time, my friend.”“If this is the new norm, you better watch out for your nominees.”Senator Richard Blumenthal:“If we agree on nothing else today, I hope on a bipartisan basis we can agree on how much courage it has taken for you to come forward.”Christine Blasey Ford:“Indelible in the hippocampus is the laughter — the uproarious laughter between the two, and their having fun at my expense.”“I am here today not because I want to be. I am terrified. I am here because I believe it is my civic duty to tell you what happened to me while Brett Kavanaugh and I were in high school.”“It was hard for me to breathe and I believed that Brett was going to accidentally kill me.”“I remember being on the street and feeling an enormous sense of relief that I escaped that house and that Brett and Mark were not coming outside after me.”Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh:“Such grotesque and obvious character assassination — if allowed to succeed — will dissuade competent and good people of all political persuasions from serving our country.”“This whole two-week effort has been a calculated and orchestrated political hit, fueled with apparent pent-up anger about President Trump and the 2016 election, fear that has been unfairly stoked about my judicial record, revenge on behalf of the Clintons and millions of dollars in money from outside left-wing opposition groups. This is a circus. The consequences will extend long past my nomination. The consequences will be with us for decades.”“I’m not questioning that Dr. Ford may have been sexually assaulted by some person, in some place, at some time, but I have never done that to her or to anyone.”“I ask you to judge me by the standard that you would want applied to your father, your husband, your brother or your son.”— Emily BaumgaertnerIn stark contrast to his subdued appearance this week on Fox News and contrite testimony released on Wednesday, Judge Kavanaugh was sharp and emotional — fulfilling a wish of Mr. Trump, who felt he was too robotic on television. He addressed directly the portrait Dr. Blasey painted of him as a drunken young man who tried to rape her and muffled her screams as she pleaded for help.“I liked beer. I still like beer. But I did not drink beer to the point of blacking out and I never sexually assaulted anyone.” Behaving like the lawyer he is, Judge Kavanaugh cited evidence — the testimony of other witnesses who said they have no memory of the assault, and his own “very precise” calendars from the summer of 1982 — in an effort to prove that he was never at a party with Dr. Blasey, and that the assault never happened.And he invoked his own sexual history, reiterating a comment he made on Fox: “I never had sexual intercourse or anything close to it throughout high school and for many years after that.”Judge Kavanaugh has said repeatedly in his testimony that he never blacked out from drinking. But an email he sent in 2001, released during his confirmation hearings, implied otherwise.At one point on Thursday, Ms. Mitchell asked the judge, “Did anyone ever tell you about something that happened in your presence that you didn’t remember during a time that you had been drinking?”“No,” Judge Kavanaugh said.In an email sent to friends from his work account in 2001, however, he wrote: “Excellent time. Apologies to all for missing Friday (good excuse), arriving late Saturday (weak excuse), and growing aggressive after blowing still another game of dice (don’t recall).”He does not mention drinking, and the email is from his adult life, not high school. Nonetheless, it could call into question his assertion that he never behaved in ways he did not remember the next day.Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, asked Judge Kavanaugh if he is the basis for a character in Mr. Judge’s book named “Bart O’Kavanaugh,” who drunkenly passed out in a car during Beach Week. Judge Kavanaugh’s response: accuse his questioner of “making fun” of Mr. Judge, who struggled with alcoholism.[Mark Judge’s Name Keeps Coming Up. Here’s What We Know.]Another heated exchange came when Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, repeatedly pressed Judge Kavanaugh to answer whether he would support an F.B.I. investigation into Dr. Blasey’s remarks. Judge Kavanaugh repeatedly demurred, saying he would support whatever the committee chose to do.“Personally, do you think that’s the best thing for us to do?” Mr. Durbin asked, exasperation seeping into his voice.Judge Kavanaugh seemed to roll his eyes and stayed quiet for a long pause.“You won’t answer?” Mr. Durbin asked.“This thing was held when it could have been presented in the ordinary way,” Judge Kavanaugh answered. “It could have been held and handled confidentially.” He added, “These calls wouldn’t have destroyed my family.”In saying that he could not have sexually assaulted Dr. Blasey, Judge Kavanaugh repeatedly referred to his calendar entries and said he was out of town virtually every weekend in the summer of 1982 and was too busy working during the week.But that was a curious defense. His calendar entries show plenty of socializing during the week that summer — and virtually no work. He went for “skis” — presumably “brewskis” — with two of the friends that Dr. Blasey said were at the disputed gathering on Thursday, July 1. On Wednesday, July 7, he has a notation “Columbia.” That could be Columbia University — later that month he wrote “Interview Brown” and “Interview Yale.” It could also be Columbia Country Club, where Dr. Blasey went for much of the summer to swim and dive.[Read calendar entries here.]He went with friends to a Baltimore Orioles doubleheader on a Tuesday, Aug. 3.Tucked into Judge Kavanaugh’s emotional opening statement was a lament that a high school friend of his — Renate Schroeder Dolphin, though he did not name her — has been caught up in the frenzy surrounding his nomination.In his high school yearbook, Judge Kavanaugh and some of his friends described themselves as “Renate Alumnius,” a mysterious reference that two of his classmates said was unsubstantiated boasting about the football players’ sexual conquests. Ms. Dolphin, in a statement to The New York Times, called it “horrible hurtful and simply untrue.”Judge Kavanaugh told the panel that the reference had nothing to do with sex, but that he had gone to dances with Ms. Dolphin.“That was meant to show affection,” he told the panel. “In this circus, the term is related to sex. It’s not related to sex. The woman herself noted to the media on the record, she and I never had any sexual interaction at all. So sorry to her for that yearbook reference. This may sound a bit trivial, given all that we’re here for, but one thing I want to try to make sure of in the future is my friendship with her. She was and is a great person.”That isn’t how a schoolmate of Judge Kavanaugh’s described it.“They were very disrespectful, at least verbally, with Renate,” said Sean Hagan, a Georgetown Prep student at the time, referring to Judge Kavanaugh and his football teammates. “I can’t express how disgusted I am with them, then and now.”Shadowy theories that Dr. Blasey could have mistaken the identity of her assailant have bounced through Washington’s conservative circles for days. And on Wednesday night, just hours before the hearing, Republicans on the Judiciary Committee released a document detailing their investigative work that showed they had interviewed two separate men who said they believed that they, not Judge Kavanaugh, assaulted Dr. Blasey. Even Judge Kavanaugh has speculated that perhaps Dr. Blasey was misremembering the incident.As other senators sought to clarify Dr. Blasey’s memory, Mr. Durbin took the question head on.“I am asking you to address this new defense of mistaken identity directly,” he said. “Dr. Ford, with what degree of certainly do you believe Judge Kavanaugh assaulted you?”Dr. Blasey, who sometimes uses her married name, Ford, responded unequivocally.“One hundred percent,” Dr. Blasey said.— Nicholas FandosAfter watching a morning of grueling testimony in silence, senior Republican senators said loudly that they stood by Judge Kavanaugh, with one Republican on the committee saying they had been “ambushed” by the Democrats and another proclaiming that he is ready to vote.“All I can say is that we are 40-something days from the election and their only goal, not Ms. Ford’s goal, is to delay this past the midterms so they can win the Senate and never allow Trump to fill this seat,” Mr. Graham, Republican of South Carolina, told reporters in an angry monologue just outside the hearing room. “I believe that now more than ever.”Mr. Graham said he was certain that Judge Kavanaugh would deliver an equally unequivocal denial of her account, and senators would be left where they began the day.“That’s the facts I’m left with: A nice lady who has come forward to tell a hard story that’s uncorroborated,” Mr. Graham said. If “this is enough, God help anybody else who gets nominated,” he added. “Based on what I heard today, you could not get a search warrant or an arrest warrant.”Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the chamber’s No. 2 Republican and another member of the committee, said senators were in much the same place they started the day.“You need more than an accusation for evidence,” he said. “You need corroboration and that’s what’s missing here.”Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin, was asked what he thought of Dr. Blasey’s testimony. He replied, “I think most people listen to Professor Ford and think that she believes what she is saying.”Asked if he believes her, Mr. Johnson replied: “I think she believes what she is saying.”But those senators were never thought to hold votes that were in play. Senators who do, including the Republicans Susan Collins of Maine, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Jeff Flake of Arizona, avoided reporters into the afternoon and said they would have nothing to say before the hearing with Judge Kavanaugh concluded. Privately, Democrats speculated that the consistency and forcefulness of Dr. Blasey’s testimony would put these senators in an unenviable bind with an election approaching.To that, Mr. Graham delivered a threat: “If this is the new norm, you better watch out for your nominees.”— Catie EdmondsonWith Republicans deferring to Ms. Mitchell, Democrats used their allotted time to make broad political points about the integrity of Republicans’ investigation, the treatment of the victims of sexual violence in the United States and Dr. Blasey in particular.In one poignant exchange, Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, reached for a quote from a colleague across the dais, Mr. Graham. Rather than use Mr. Graham’s statements dismissing the accusations against Judge Kavanaugh, Mr. Blumenthal began reading from a passage from the senator’s 2015 book, “My Story.”“I learned how much unexpected courage from a deep and hidden place it takes for a rape victim or sexually abused child to testify against their assailant,” Mr. Graham wrote of his time as a prosecutor and Mr. Blumenthal read Thursday. “I learned how much courage from a deep and hidden place it takes for a rape victim or sexually abused child to testify against their assailant.”Mr. Blumenthal then said, “If we agree on nothing else today, I hope on a bipartisan basis we can agree on how much courage it has taken for you to come forward.”[Women speak out on their own experiences of sexual assault.]The contrast to Mr. Graham then and Mr. Graham now was striking. On Wednesday, he said his support for Judge Kavanaugh has not dimmed, concluding, “I don’t think he’s Bill Cosby.”Dr. Blasey’s testimony inspired at least one woman to call into C-Span3 to share their own story of sexual abuse.The caller, who identified herself as Brenda from Valley Park, Mo., tearfully told the host that Dr. Blasey’s appearance had caused an old trauma from her childhood to re-emerge.“I’m a 76-year-old woman who was sexually molested in the second grade,” she said. She said her attacker had been a boy in seventh grade at her school.“This brings back so much pain,” she said. “I thought I was over it, but it is not. You will never forget it. You get confused and you don’t understand it, but you never forget what happened to you.”But not every caller had the same reaction as Brenda. A viewer named James, from Princeton, Ind., said Dr. Blasey was “lying like a dog.”James, who said he was “not a big Trump supporter,” said he found much of Dr. Blasey’s testimony to be inconsistent.“I wish that dang prosecutor had said, ‘Listen, I need more than five minutes and I could take her to the woodshed,’” he said.During the questioning, Dr. Blasey’s background as a professor of psychology affiliated with Stanford University and Palo Alto University shaped her answers to questions. For example, describing the lingering consequences of having been attacked as a teenager, she invoked an obscure term — sequela — which refers to aftereffects of a disease or traumatic incident.Asked how she remembers that it was Judge Kavanaugh and not some other person who attacked her, she answered clinically with a description of how memories of traumatic events form in the brain: “Just basic memory functions and also just the level of norepinephrine and the epinephrine in the brain that sort of, as you know, encodes — that neurotransmitter that codes memories into the hippocampus and so the trauma-related experience is locked there whereas other details kind of drift.”Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, the ranking Democrat on the committee, responded: “So what you are telling us is this could not be a case of mistaken identity.”“Absolutely not,” Dr. Blasey replied.And, a bit later, asked what her strongest memory was, something she could not forget, she replied: “Indelible into the hippocampus is the laughter — the uproarious laughter between the two, and their having fun at my expense.”— Charlie SavageRepublicans said they chose to turn over their questions to Ms. Mitchell, a sex crimes prosecutor, so that they could have a more targeted, coherent hearing. But as her questioning began, the arrangement appeared more halting and cumbersome than efficient, as it resembled a courtroom trial more than a typical Senate hearing.The juxtaposition was jarring, particularly with Democrats using their time to cut straight to the heart of Dr. Blasey’s story. After Dr. Blasey’s opening statement gripped the hearing room, Ms. Mitchell immediately dug into granular details, asking the witness to read and correct messages she exchanged with a reporter at The Washington Post and a letter shared with Ms. Feinstein.“The first two texts were sent by you on July 6, is that correct?” Ms. Mitchell asked. Dr. Blasey spent long moments reading printouts of both and began to work through technical corrections.And with only five-minute blocks at her disposal, Ms. Mitchell was repeatedly cut off mid-questioning.“Miss Mitchell, I don’t know whether this is fair to interrupt. I want to keep people within five minutes,” Mr. Grassley said. “Is that a major problem for you in the middle of a question?”Then again, Republicans on the committee may have been no better. During the lunch break, Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, one of the three senators on the committee who were there for the Clarence Thomas-Anita F. Hill hearings, told reporters, “I don’t think she’s uncredible. I think she’s an attractive, good witness.”Asked what he meant by “attractive,” he said, “In other words, she’s pleasing.”— Nicholas FandosAs the hearing neared a close, Senator Kamala Harris, Democrat of California, asked Judge Kavanaugh whether he would submit to a polygraph test the way Dr. Blasey did. He said he would, though it would be inadmissable in court and not much use.But Judge Kavanaugh has written that polygraph tests do have a role to play in law enforcement. In a 2016 opinion for a unanimous three-judge panel of his court, he ruled that the Defense Department could withhold reports concerning the effectiveness of polygraph tests in response to request under the Freedom of Information Act.The studies were exempt from disclosure, Judge Kavanaugh wrote, because they concerned “an important law enforcement tool.”“The government has satisfactorily explained how polygraph examinations serve law enforcement purposes,” he wrote. “It has also explained how the reports assessing the efficacy of those examinations and identifying needed fixes likewise serve law enforcement purposes. Put simply, the reports help ensure that law enforcement officers optimally use an important law enforcement tool.”— Adam LiptakA group of 10 women watching the hearings in Bangor, Me. — the home state of Senator Susan Collins, whose vote will be pivotal in Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation, started out suspicious that Dr. Blasey had partisan motivations; some declared they believed her, while others said they were determined to approach the hearings with an open mind.Jean Barry, a high school science teacher and a firm opponent of abortion rights, began listening to the hearing concerned about the timing of the accusations.“So far she seems somewhat credible, like she’s telling us something that happened from her heart,” she said.Emily McLaughlin, a sophomore at the University of Maine who was a treasurer for the college Republicans, said she believed Dr. Blasey, but wanted to hear from Judge Kavanaugh and wondered, too, whether she just had one beer.During the short recess, the group had a lively back and forth. While most believed Dr. Blasey, some were waiting to hear further questioning and believed it was important to hear Judge Kavanaugh. They gathered again around the television as the hearings resumed, listening intently.— Susan ChiraAt the conclusion of her opening remarks, Ms. Feinstein said that the issue for the Senate to decide is not just whether it is true that Judge Kavanaugh, as a teenager, sexually assaulted Dr. Blasey, but also whether Judge Kavanaugh is being honest today about his past behavior.“We are here for one reason, to determine whether Judge Kavanaugh should be elevated to one of the most powerful positions in our country,” she said. “This is not a trial of Dr. Ford. It’s a job interview for Judge Kavanaugh. Is Brett Kavanaugh who we want on the most prestigious court in our country? Is he the best we can do?”Even before Dr. Blasey had come forward, Democrats had attacked Judge Kavanaugh’s credibility, arguing that Bush White House emails had shown that he had misled the Senate when he came before it as an appeals court nominee in 2004 and 2006, in distancing himself from various Bush-era controversies including work on other disputed appeals court nominees and Senate Republican staffers’ then-secret infiltration of internal Democratic computer files to learn which nominees they were likely to try to block and with what tactics.— Charlie SavageGet politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.Advertisement