https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/22/books/review/christine-schutt-pure-hollywood.html
Short Stories That Travel the World From a Deliciously Off-Kilter Perspective - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2179
AdvertisementSupported byThe ShortlistBy Julie Orringer PURE HOLLYWOODAnd Other StoriesBy Christine Schutt132 pp. Grove. $23.Fans of Schutt, a finalist for the National Book Award and the Pulitzer Prize, expect to be thrown off balance and relish the sensation. Indeed, this collection of 11 stories, stretched on a taut diagonal between Maine and Los Angeles, nimbly kicks us sideways at every turn. Schutt’s stories — awash in money, lush foliage and coyly named houses — menace and sometimes subsume their desperate characters. In the title story, a young widow, left penniless by her rich husband, flees to the California desert where she grew up; in a house that may or may not have been her childhood home, she sees another woman shot in the face by the woman’s own son.In “The Hedges,” a self-involved young couple at a resort, burdened by their needy toddler, abandon him to the care of a kind but distracted 12-year-old, with disastrous results. Dan, the aging protagonist of “Species of Special Concern,” pines for Nancy, the co-owner of the Maine plant nursery he visits yearly; Nancy, dying of cancer, strikes out into the fields on her four-wheeled A.T.V., because “howling was something to be done in the wilderness.” Schutt’s offbeat and dissonant sentences make us experience language anew: “The heavy-headed mock orange, now past, Pie hacked at and hacked at until the shorn shrub looked embarrassed.” This just before Pie herself, “a long girl, wobbly in heeled shoes, bowlegged, shifty — bored perhaps — but friendly, quick to laugh, on any errand making an impression,” disappears traceless from the village green. The stories are full of trapdoors, but Schutt’s craft is seamless.ALL THE NAMES THEY USED FOR GODStoriesBy Anjali Sachdeva256 pp. Spiegel & Grau. $26.The strange and wonderful stories that make up Sachdeva’s debut begin on this side of reality and slip to the other — often so gracefully, and with such a precise rendering of the fantastical, that we become inadvertent believers. “The World by Night” plunges us into a cave beneath a prairie, where Sadie, an abandoned albino bride, finds herself seduced by a dark and glittering world populated by elusive creatures like herself. “Glass-Lung” begins with a furnace accident in a Pennsylvania steel mill; its only survivor clings to life with the help of his 8-year-old daughter, who, in the kind of surprising shift typical of these stories, ends up working in a museum as the secretary to an archaeologist, then serving as the archaeologist’s assistant on a search for an Egyptian tomb.The associative structure of these stories feels neither random nor manipulative, just delightfully unexpected. When the deep-sea fisherman Robert Greenman, the title character of one story, sights a mermaid in the rolling swells of the ocean, our belief in her depends as much on Sachdeva’s realistic portrayal of Greenman’s workaday life as it does on her description of the mermaid herself: “He would have said her hair was tangled except that it did not look as though it should be otherwise; he felt that combing it out would be like trying to comb a person’s limbs. Each indigo strand was as thick as a twig, and had the moist look of an anemone. All her veins were clearly visible beneath her skin.” The brilliance of these stories — beyond the cool, precise artistry of their prose — is their embrace of both the known and the unknown, in a combination that feels truly original.NIGHT HAWKSStoriesBy Charles Johnson177 pp. Scribner. $24.Johnson, the celebrated novelist, short story writer, screenwriter and essayist, here combines a finely tuned sense of humor with a desire to probe questions that lie at the heart of a reflective existence: Is there a meaningful difference between self and other? How can we purport to teach anything to anyone else when we’re deeply aware of our own ignorance? And this one, not for the faint of heart: “If you paused for just a moment and pulled back from our minuscule dust mote of a planet in one of a hundred billion galaxies pinwheeling across a 13-billion-year-old universe that one day would experience proton death, then it was certain that all men and women had ever done would one day be as if it never was. I wondered: Had we then wasted our lives?”Johnson, a longtime student of Buddhism, combines spiritual thought with social criticism in stories that often address the struggles of African-Americans. In “The Weave,” a woman experiences existential regret after she and her boyfriend steal $230,000 worth of wigs and hair extensions. In “Follow the Drinking Gourd,” a man who has fled slavery returns to the South to free his wife’s cousin; during their escape, he wrestles with the urge to kill her crying baby, weighing the baby’s life against the adults’ potential freedom. And in “Kamadhatu: A Modern Sutra,” a self-doubting Japanese monk receives a devastating bolt of enlightenment when he’s visited by an earnest and voluble African-American scholar looking for a teacher. Reading these stories, one feels honored to be in the presence of Johnson’s witty philosophical mind, and, not incidentally, stunned by the graceful virtuosity of his sentences. His book is a small treasure, one to be read and considered and reread.THE ISLAND DWELLERSStoriesBy Jen Silverman259 pp. Random House. $27.The island dwellers of Silverman’s linked stories may live within the dense crush of Tokyo or New York City, but they’re all trapped inside mini-worlds of their own making, impeded by sticky relationships, lack of money or severed connections to their former selves. “Sometimes I’m afraid I’ll forget how to be who I am,” the narrator of “Pretoria” says, contemplating whether to stay in Tokyo and marry her Japanese boyfriend or go home to South Africa without him. All of these stories are told from a first-person point of view, but each narrator is distinct; some we’ve met earlier as secondary characters in other stories, and the inside view yields satisfying insight. One of Silverman’s recurrent ideas is how blind we can be toward those we claim to adore — a blindness induced by self-interest, immaturity or ignorance.In “White People,” Cynthia convinces herself that her boyfriend hails from Venezuela; as she imagines his foreign upbringing, she fails to take note of his Queens accent or to question his non-Venezuelan name. Maria, the protagonist of “Maria of the Grapes,” falls in love with a gay American man who works in a Tokyo kyabakura, where patrons pay to flirt and drink with him. Hoping that her love will make her an exception in his life, she ignores every sign to the contrary.“How can we know what will come of the strangers we bring close?” the narrator of “The Pike” asks, contemplating the disastrous affair between Ted Hughes and Assia Wevill. “And who can resist a story in which the price of unknowing is so high?” These stories, in any case, are irresistible, delivering a portrait of contemporary relationships that, although bleak, is shot through with veins of real connection.Julie Orringer is the author of a novel, “The Invisible Bridge,” and a collection of stories, “How to Breathe Underwater.”Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.Advertisement