https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/07/dining/white-gold-butchers-review-april-bloomfield-restaurant.html
White Gold Butchers Slices to the Point: Meats Cooked Simply - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2021
AdvertisementSupported byRestaurant Review11 PhotosView Slide Show ›When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Pete WellsI’ve finally found a new restaurant on the Upper West Side that I want to recommend to people who don’t live there. It has only taken me five years.In my time as critic, I’ve searched the streets between Lincoln Center and Columbia University for good places to eat. I’ve come across some, but I could never convince myself that any of them were worth a special trip. That finally changed after October, when Ken Friedman and April Bloomfield opened White Gold Butchers, a restaurant inside a butcher shop on Amsterdam Avenue.Here’s something strange: In all this time, I’ve never heard from Upper West Side readers either attacking me for ignoring their neighborhood or tipping me off to a gem I’d overlooked. Have they just given up hope after watching the local restaurants they could honestly tell friends were worth traveling for — Picholine, Telepan, Ouest — close one by one?Another odd thing: White Gold is the first Bloomfield-Friedman restaurant where I have never had to wait to be seated. True, one night I showed up ridiculously early, and by the time I left, a small crowd by the door was eyeing my table. But people in the neighborhood tell me it is possible more often than not to walk right in and sit down. This is not typically the case at the Spotted Pig, the Breslin Bar & Dining Room, Salvation Burger or other restaurants run by Ms. Bloomfield and Mr. Friedman.Where is everybody? People, April Bloomfield is cooking meat, one of the things she does best.Two young butchers, Jocelyn Guest and Erika Nakamura, are partners in the restaurant; in their blue aprons and white shirts, they oversee the carving and trimming and sawing and chopping. Looking at the colors in the glass butcher’s case, the plum purple of the raw pork and the marigold yellow of the chicken skin, you know that this meat will cook up so nicely that it can be eaten and enjoyed all by itself. White Gold doesn’t go quite that far, but it comes close.The menu gets right to the point, no small talk: The main courses fall under the heading Plates. There are usually four of them, cooked very simply. A gorgeously juicy and pink length of grilled pork, for example, was flecked with sage salt, and its only garnish was a spoonful of sauce made from apples — not applesauce but a saltier and more complex reduction.Beef heart was served like steak, sliced into small, tender, nearly rare slabs. The spice-and-nut blend dukkah was the seasoning. Probably meant more for the roasted carrots on the same plate, the dukkah was also at home with the heart.A special one night was a portion of pork shoulder cooked in milk at a quiet murmur until the meat had relaxed and the liquid had boiled away and the fat had pulled together in sweet curds the color of peanut butter. It sounds and looks creepy, but it’s wonderful.As good as it felt to lose myself in tender pork and caramelized milk, the high point of that dinner was beef carpaccio. White Gold now makes my favorite version of this classic Italian dish in New York. The toppings are sliced white mushrooms, parsley leaves and pickled broccoli stems. I’d never given much thought to pickled broccoli stems before, but now I think their highest use is with darkly lush sheets of raw beef furred over with fine white horseradish gratings.The raviolo in brodo is Italian, too, up to a point. The broth is beef, deeply brown and sticky on the lips. For the single raviolo, two circles of barely cooked kabocha squash do the work normally done by pasta, sandwiching a creamy core of taleggio that will end up running out and slipping into the broth, no matter how careful you are, flavoring the soup along with red drops of pumpkinseed oil.If none of this has persuaded you to take a train or crosstown bus to the Upper West Side, then it’s time to let the “crispy layered potato” out of its cage.These are little golden boxes made of thin rectangles of potato stacked like Post-it notes, then fried in beef fat. I’m not sure how they stay together. They are crunchy and delicate and impossible to stop eating. White Gold has found a way to multiply the surface area of a fairly small piece of potato so that more potato comes into contact with hot oil. This is a significant advance in the field of applied potato physics.Like Fleishers Craft Butchery, Dickson’s Farmstand Meats and a few other butcher shops, White Gold buys whole animals. In theory, the cooks should be able to get creative with the odds and ends, yet offal isn’t a major feature of the menu. I have to admit that the White Gold of my dreams would serve not just chicken liver mousse but gizzard confit; not just grilled lamb leg but sautéed kidneys; not just pork shoulder but stuffed trotters.In the morning, White Gold is devoted to egg sandwiches. At lunch, you can order a version of the chopped cheese, a late-night specialty of bodegas in Harlem and the Bronx. As the sandwich has started showing up in other neighborhoods, at higher prices, it has become a symbol of cultural appropriation and gentrification. White Gold sells it for $11, roughly twice what it would cost on its home turf.It is also a somewhat odd interpretation, not so much the classic cheese-slicked heap of ground beef as a cheeseburger hacked into chunks.Britain does better than the Bronx on White Gold’s lunch menu. Head straight to the savory-pastry case and get a sausage roll, a stub of golden crust wrapped around pink, coarse breakfast sausages, or a pasty, a hand pie that can be held by its rolled seam, which looks like a fat lip. One pasty is filled with potatoes and fontina; another with beef stew. Both are so good I’d recommend buying an extra to tote around in an empty pocket.One reason White Gold isn’t mobbed at night may be that, for the first time, Mr. Friedman and Ms. Bloomfield have built a restaurant without a bar. Wine and beer are available, from Narragansett in a can to (when I was there) a six-year-old bottle of petit verdot from Clendenen Family Vineyards, but there’s nowhere to drink them unless you’re eating.The space doesn’t encourage hanging out with a glass. This may have to do with the bright lighting — butchers need to be able to see to do their work — or the relative starkness of the atmosphere. The wallpaper in the restroom has more energy than the rest of the interior design put together.White Gold reminds me of small, obscure, excellent restaurants I’ve tripped into during vacations, the tapas bar or the trattoria that happened to be close to where I was staying and that I remember better than the places other people had recommended before I left home.White Gold may never be a destination, but in its modest and simple way, it’s memorable.When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.This information was last updated on Nov. 17, 2018Reservations powered by ResyEMAIL petewells@nytimes.com. And follow Pete Wells on Twitter: @pete_wellsAdvertisement