https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/29/learning/summer-reading-contest-winner-week-9-on-to-beyonce-or-not-to-beyonce-the-challenges-of-confirming-the-birth-of-her-twins.html
Summer Reading Contest Winner, Week 9 | On ‘To Beyoncé or Not to Beyoncé: The Challenges of Confirming the Birth of Her Twins’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2510
AdvertisementSupported byContestsBy The Learning NetworkThank you to the 1,292 teenagers who participated in the ninth week of our 10-week Summer Reading Contest and congratulations to Hannah Li, our winner, as well as to our many runners-up and honorable mentions.Scroll down to take a look at the variety of topics that caught the eyes of our participants.Hannah Li, from Syracuse, N.Y., chose “To Beyoncé or Not to Beyoncé: The Challenges of Confirming the Birth of Her Twins,” and wrote:As long as you’re not living under a rock, you know Beyoncé recently had twins. That’s not news. But what was news to me was that The New York Times took great precaution when publishing the story. I mean, it’s Beyoncé! We want all the news we can get regarding her pregnancy. We don’t care if it’s just rumors! Right? Wrong.In “To Beyoncé or Not to Beyoncé: The Challenges of Confirming the Birth of Her Twins,” Maya Salam explains her process of confirming details. When the rumors first leaked, all the gossip mags and many news sources jumped to publish something about the twins. Facts couldn’t be confirmed since neither Beyoncé or Jay-Z were talking, but that didn’t stop publications. Salam contacted many sources she had deemed reliable but she came back empty-handed from most. Nevertheless, she persisted and eventually found solid information.This made me realize that The New York Times actually cares about all its facts, even in the most trivial aspects of life. Beyoncé is famous, so gossip mags and fans don’t really pay attention to the fact that even though Queen B is sometimes seen as a goddess, she is, in fact, human. So it’s important to keep the facts about her twins straight. In this era of fake news, it’s important to stay vigilant about what we hear and read, especially on the news. And if news sources have to work hard to get the facts straight on something as lighthearted as Beyoncé, then they must work even harder to maintain the veracity of harder topics.GoBlue18Liam on “Roman Polanski Accused of Sexual Abuse by Another Woman”Ishika Gupta (HuskieHonors11) on “YouTube Falls Hard for ‘In a Heartbeat,’ a Boy-Meets-Boy Story”Felix Hu on “Liu Xiaobo, We Miss You”Tim Kim on “Field Is ‘Perfect Place to Die,’ Rookie Says in Front of Roger Goodell”Jimmy Lin on “What a Fraternity Hazing Death Revealed About the Painful Search for an Asian-American Identity”Emily Pottebaum on “Squeezed by an India-China Standoff, Bhutan Holds Its Breath”Kiara R on “1 in 7 New York City Elementary Students Will Be Homeless, Report Says”Alexis Szymczyk on “YouTube Falls Hard for ‘In a Heartbeat’”Jacquelyn Allaire-MacDonald on “In Protest, Artist in Germany Re-Purposes Hate Speech From Twitter”Hanna AlZaridi on “Icy, Sweet and Instagram-Ready”Olivia Apa on “The Faces of New York City’s Pride Parade”Alexander Arenas on “What Music Do Americans Love the Most? 50 Detailed Fan Maps”bengal11Grace191050 on “Where the Teacher’s Pet Sleeps in a Dog Bed”Charanya Birabaharan on “Michelle Carter Gets 15-Month Jail Term in Texting Suicide Case”Anand Chundi on “India at 70, and the Passing of Another Illusion- Pankaj Mishra”Isabella Cilino on “Pulling Back on the Barbaric Use of Solitary Confinement”Haylei Coolican on “Anger Rooms Are All the Rage. Timidly, We Gave One a Whack”Lucia Davis on “Man Charged After White Nationalist Rally in Charlottesville Ends in Deadly Violence”Amanda Donahue on “Michelle Carter Gets 15-Month Jail Term in Texting Suicide Case”Ellen Fleming on “Bold Advance Could Mean Pig-to-Human Transplants by 2020”Hannah on “Icy, Sweet and Instagram-Ready”Ray Huang on “Preventing Teen Suicide: What the Evidence Shows”Jill on “Why Do Bees Buzz?”Colleen Keller on “Baltimore Mayor Had Statues Removed in ‘Best Interest of My City’”Derek Lewis on “Anger Rooms Are All the Rage. Timidly, We Gave One a Whack”Katherine Mackowiak on “Trump Defends Initial Remarks on Charlottesville; Again Blames ‘Both Sides’”Sophia Oriakuon “Civil Rights Group Sues Nebraska State Prison System”Madeline Osovski on “My Dad’s Sudden Outburst: I Love You”Sireesh Ramesh on “A Border Fence Blurred Through Art”Ofry Shefy on “Out of High School, Into Real Life”Uttam Shrestha on “As Vehicle Attacks Rise, an Ordinary Object Becomes an Instrument of Fear”Ashley Soares on “Swastikas, Shields and Flags: Branding Hate in Charlottesville”Alexa Stewart on “How to Conquer the Admissions Essay”Dominic T-C on “Let Prisoners Learn While They Serve”Wyatt Thorndill-Leeon “Baltimore Mayor Had Statues Removed in ‘Best Interest of My City’”Kristina Vakhman on “Trump’s Embrace of Racially Charged Past Puts Republicans in Crisis”Anna VanderLaan on “Learning to Learn: You, Too, Can Rewire Your Brain”Simon Wallace on “Finland Has a Sports Screw Loose”Elizabeth Wang on “Desserts Designed for Social Media”Sarah Webb on “Developmentally Disabled, and Going to College”Emma Weber on “For 18 Hours, Cabby Sat Dead in Front Seat”Lily Whitmoyer on “Michelle Carter Gets 15-Months Jail Term in Texting Suicide Case”Benjamin Worden on “You’ll Never Be as Radical as This 18th-Century Quaker Dwarf”Yizhang Xu on “How Exercise Could Help You Learn a New Language”Advertisement