https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/dining/wine-school-assignment-new-zealand-sauvignon-blanc.html
Your Next Lesson: New Zealand Sauvignon Blanc - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2244
AdvertisementSupported byWine SchoolBy Eric AsimovConfession: It has been a while since I have regularly consumed our next wine, New Zealand sauvignon blanc. I used to drink it more consistently years ago, back in the 1990s, when I found it a versatile partner in the restaurants I frequented.It has been a resounding success story. Sauvignon blanc put New Zealand on the map as a wine-producing country, and its brash, herbaceous style proved highly popular with consumers.In recent years, though, I began to find the wines fatiguing. They seemed not so brash, with riper tropical fruit flavors, and often with a bit of sweetness. I attributed this, perhaps unfairly, to many producers coasting with a cash cow as they put their more serious efforts into pinot noir, which some New Zealanders believe is a wine of higher status.Nonetheless, the classic New Zealand style has remained influential as producers from South America to the United States to South Africa to France itself have emulated it. When good, the wines can be energetic, vivacious and brisk. It seemed like a good, summery selection to revisit or to explore for the first time.Here are my three recommendations:Seresin Estate Marlborough Momo Sauvignon Blanc 2015 (The Sorting Table, Napa, Calif.) $17Huia Marlborough Sauvignon Blanc 2016 (T. Edward Wines, New York) $19Cloudy Bay Marlborough Sauvignon Blanc 2016 (Moët Hennessy U.S.A., New York) $27If you can’t find these, have no fear. Dozens of other labels will do. Momo is the entry level for Seresin. If you don’t mind spending a little more for the estate’s flagship wine, it’s worth trying. Other producers to look out for include Arona, Dog Point, Highfield, Craggy Range, Lawson’s Dry Hills and Whitehaven.These wines go well with many summery foods, particularly salads, asparagus and simple seafoods, as well as many Thai and Vietnamese dishes. I also like them with Middle Eastern spreads, like hummus and baba ghanouj, and kebabs.Drink these cold, not icy, but on the colder end of the spectrum.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.Characteristics to ConsiderAromaGrassy is the reflex description for these wines. How would you describe them?DistinctivenessHow do these sauvignon blancs differ from others you have had, if at all?TextureHow do they feel in the mouth? Does texture have bearing on the quality of the wines?Advertisement