https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/07/opinion/the-argument-abortion-medicare-for-all.html
Opinion | The Abortion Debate - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
250
AdvertisementtranscriptWith Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David LeonhardtAnd is Medicare for all even possible?Thursday, February 7th, 2019michelle goldbergI’m Michelle Goldberg.ross douthatI’m Ross Douthat.david leonhardtI’m David Leonhardt, and this is “The Argument.” This week we’re taking a look at abortion laws around the country.ross douthatThere is this sort of zone of abortions that the pro-choice side is defending that most Americans in the middle don’t support.david leonhardtThen, “Medicare for all.” Could it ever actually work?diane archerWe’re the wealthiest country in the world. There is a way.david leonhardtAnd finally a recommendation.michelle goldbergI just need to say that Ross is younger than me. [LAUGHS]david leonhardtLast week a video from the Virginia statehouse created a political firestorm. It showed a Democratic legislator, Kathy Tran, making the case for a bill that would remove some abortion restrictions. Among other things, third-trimester abortions would be available even if a woman’s health were not at risk. The response from pro-life advocates was swift.news clipThe move sparking outcry all across the country with many Americans asking how is this O.K.?david leonhardtThey said that the video was proof that Democrats supported live-birth abortions. The pro-choice side called this charge false, and a national debate ensued. In the State of the Union address President Trump made sure to mention abortion.president donald trumpI am asking Congress to pass legislation to prohibit the late-term abortion of children.david leonhardtSince we started this podcast we have heard from listeners asking us to have a conversation about abortion. It is a subject that both Michelle and Ross write about regularly from very different perspectives. And today is the day that we’re going to get into it. Michelle why don’t we start with you. Can you break down for us what exactly the bill proposes?michelle goldbergSo first you have Kathy Tran, the delegate who introduced this legislation. It’s been introduced in many, many past legislative sessions. It would basically take away some of the restrictions on third-trimester abortion in Virginia.david leonhardtIn existing law it needs to be three doctors and they need to testify that it would deeply harm the health of mother.michelle goldbergRight. So in existing law they need to say that it would substantially impair the mental or physical health of the woman. So Kathy Tran is testifying and she’s presented with this hypothetical that is really both ridiculous and kind of insulting, right?david leonhardtBy a Republican legislator.michelle goldbergBy a Republican, right. Like, “What if the woman is dilating she’s about to deliver her baby and she gets a certification that she can have an abortion. Could she do an under your bill?”delegate kathy tranMr. Chairman, that would be a, you know, a decision that the doctor, the physician and the woman would make at that point.delegate todd gilbertI understand that, I’m asking you if your bill allows that.delegate kathy tranMy bill would allow that. Yes.michelle goldbergYou know she should have said like, “Hypothetically yes but that will never happen.” Instead she just said yes, that would be allowed. So this goes viral. “Pro-choice radicals want abortion on the delivery table!” And then Ralph Northam is on the radio and—david leonhardtThe Virginia governor as we now all know.michelle goldbergRight, the Virginia governor. So the Virginia governor who, in addition to being an egregious racist, is also a pediatric neurologist. So he’s asked about this and he basically says that he, I think, is - and this seems to me the most logical explanation for what he’s talking about - he’s basically saying in a situation in which the pregnancy is failing, in a situation in which you have this fetus that you know is not going to survive and you’re on the delivery table. The sort of, in the situation, in the hypothetical that this Republican lawmaker has presented, here’s what would actually happen: the woman would deliver the baby. It would be resuscitated and then the parents would make a decision. But conservatives heard that and they thought, “Oh my god, they’re trying to pass a law that you could basically change your mind about having a baby while you’re in the middle of labor and then have it killed afterwards.” You know, Marco Rubio’s tweeting about it. Now Ben Sasse wants some sort of resolution to prohibit this thing that doesn’t happen, which is this sort of legislation as propaganda because, you know, if you’re kind of banning something you’re basically admitting that you think it’s a thing in the first place. But it has now reignited this debate about third-term abortion.david leonhardtAnd so just before we get to Ross, you are in favor of this legislation because you feel like, look this will apply to a tiny number of cases but they are heartbreaking cases where it is extremely difficult circumstances, babies are dying, and we don’t want to put bureaucratic hurdles — legal hurdles — in front of mothers in these situations.michelle goldbergSo to be super clear, we actually don’t know and there actually isn’t good data about all of the reasons that women seek third-trimester abortions. I mean we do know that one reason that women seek third-trimester abortions is essentially a form of miscarriage management, right? When the pregnancy is sort of failing over time and there’s actually in some places nothing in the law that allows the medical system to deal with women in that circumstance, right? So women have to carry failing pregnancies for weeks or, you know, are forced to kind of go through stillbirths when they would have preferred to terminate two months earlier. I think there probably are cases that are going to be allowed under this law that I would probably consider morally abhorrent. But to me the greater danger and what the reform is trying to do — and let’s be clear, this reform isn’t happening, right? This is something that was proposed by a delegate that never had any chance of passing, even though we’re all talking about it and it’s now become a subject of national controversy. You know, I had a really close relationship with with my O.B., right? I can’t imagine in that situation then having to get permission from two other doctors to do what we decided was best.david leonhardtRoss I know you think of this bill very differently, both in terms of what it would do but also in terms of how important it is because, as you’ve pointed out, in New York State for example they actually have passed a version of this law. So take us through your thoughts on this law.ross douthatSo I guess it’s useful to think of this in terms of, sort of, two sets of cases that the anti-abortion side, my side of the argument, is thinking about when we argue about this bill and when we talk about a viral video clip like this one. Right? So the first is a set of cases that do relate specifically to what happens to infants - former fetuses turned babies - that are either born alive in the course of a late-term abortion or in some potential world are born alive with a terrible medical condition, a serious disability and so on. And that’s a very, very small number of cases especially in the first case but they do, in fact, exist, right? And there is a lot of legal uncertainty about what happens in those cases, what is allowed in those cases, whether there is a legal right to life for that being, that creature. At the same time, the other thing that the pro-life side is trying to highlight in these arguments is the argument against abortion at 39 weeks extends perfectly reasonably back to abortion at 32 weeks and abortion at 27 weeks and so on. There are very, very few abortions in the United States that take place at 36 or 37 weeks. There are a lot of abortions in the U.S. that take place on basically the line between the second and third trimesters of pregnancy. There are various estimates but —david leonhardtAnd that’s what week?ross douthatThat would be 22 to 26 or 27 weeks, right? And so the reason these bills then become a flashpoint is both about the possibility of infants being killed outside of the mother’s womb, which is rare but real, and also the fact that there’s just a larger argument here, right? Where what is at stake is the question of whether a fetus is human and what kind of rights it has. And talking about the reality that, you know, you have this moment where legally something ceases to be a fetus and becomes a baby by passing out of the mother. That’s a way of highlighting the fact that in terms of its own being, its own ontology, if you will, it doesn’t change at that moment. And any changes further back through pregnancy are incredibly gradual changes. And if you are, as this - a person in the mushy middle - and we can, you know, we can use you as our person in the mushy middle. [MICHELLE LAUGHS] If you are appalled by the admittedly extreme possibility of an unborn baby being aborted at 39 weeks, you might be appalled by the same thing happening at 26 weeks and then we’ve tugged you a little bit towards what I think is the correct take, which is that abortion is too abhorrent to be, in most cases, legally permitted.michelle goldbergFirst of all, obviously I can’t speak for the pro-choice movement. But my own sense is that, when you were talking before about the reluctance of people on the pro-choice side to extend protections to babies that are born after a botched abortion, it is not because they are afraid that extending - or at least personally - it’s not that I’m afraid that extending legal rights to a baby would then sort of raise the question of why those same set of legal rights shouldn’t have adhered, you know 15 minutes earlier. It’s that there’s a law against infanticide, right? And so from my point of view what I see these laws is trying to do — again, I see them as sort of legal propaganda — trying to instantiate in the law prohibitions on something that it has not been made clear to me either happens, and if it does happen is not already illegal. But the thing I appreciate the most about what Ross says is that he kind of admits what people on the pro-choice side know, which does that the point of these laws are to be the sort of thin edge of the wedge in a broader quest to make all abortion illegal.ross douthatSure and similarly I appreciate Michelle conceding that inherent in the pro-choice position is the tolerance of something that in your own language are morally abhorrent in order to protect the greater good of women’s rights and so on. Right? So I think we’ve both sort of admitted something, not against interest because I think it’s important to understand this debate, right? I mean the pro-life side is in this interesting position in this country where there is a set of abortions that are largely legal in America, but generally legal under Supreme Court jurisprudence, that would not be legal in other countries and that are extremely unpopular. Right? If you poll abortion after 20 weeks, if you poll third-trimester abortion, it’s a 60/40, 70/30, 80/20 kind of issue against the pro-choice side. This is a political advantage even though, again from the pro-life side, it’s also a great human tragedy, right, that there is this sort of zone of abortions that the pro-choice side is defending that most Americans in the middle don’t support. And the offer that the pro-choice side makes — to you David — [ALL LAUGH] is basically to say, “You know, we understand that you don’t agree with us that first and second-trimester abortion should be illegal. But if you agree with us on this much, it’s a reasonable move for you to make and you will still have the option not to listen to us about the other two trimesters. So won’t you come along with us this far?” While Michelle is saying, “But look, they’re admitting that they want to go further.” And the reality is that, that we do, right? It’s not the case that pro-lifers are just being dishonest. Like even from a pro-life premise, there is a particular horror to third-trimester abortions, right? The pro-life view would be look, abortion is always a form of murder but there are various forms of murder and murdering a more conscious, more sentient form of human life is worse than doing it in the first trimester. So there’s a consistent pro-life case for thinking all abortion should be outlawed but third-trimester abortions especially. But with that being said, again allowing for the real complexities of human life and the necessity of certain legal exceptions, they all should be outlawed.michelle goldbergSo people will point out that, you know, in European countries abortion is is typically tightly regulated after, I don’t, I don’t even know, I think —ross douthatEither 12 or 20 weeks, basically.michelle goldbergRight. So I think that, you know, pro-choice people — I think most of us — would say well if that’s the compromise, we’ll take it. We would happily trade a situation in which abortion is free, widely available and uncontested in the first trimester in exchange for these sorts of restrictions. The reason that we’re not willing to sign on to these sorts of restrictions is because there’s a reason why people end up waiting too long. And there’s a reason why people end up with money troubles and it’s because a restrictive series of abortion laws ends up pushing women into the second-trimester, right? And so there’s something sort of perverse about saying, from the pro-choice perspective saying, “Well, you know, in Europe they’re willing to draw this line. Why aren’t we willing to draw this line?” I think pro-choice people, the vast majority of us, even the sort of like most hardcore, would be more than willing to make a European-style compromise. But that depends on a level of social trust that these restrictions aren’t just sort of Trojan horses that are meant to take away women’s access to abortion altogether.david leonhardtI mean the way I read the polls, there are three groups of Americans. I think they’re broadly similar in size but maybe one group is closer to 25 percent and one closer to 40. A group of Americans who basically do not want abortion in almost any circumstances to be legal. On the other side a group of Americans who want abortion be legal in almost all circumstances. And then a group in the middle who, depending how you ask the questions, will answer it in different ways, but basically are in favor of abortion being legal in some circumstances but are also in favor of some restrictions. Right?ross douthatAnd those numbers — just to jump in — have been remarkably steady over the last 40 or 50 years.david leonhardtRemarkably steady. And I certainly find myself one, agonizing over this issue and two, in that middle group. I would always — if forced to choose a label I would always choose pro-choice. But I find this issue, unlike many other issues, to be an unavoidable clash of rights: the rights of the mother and the rights of the fetus or the baby. Right? With gay marriage I see no clash of rights. With voting, I see no clash of rights. With this issue I see this unavoidable clash of rights, often a heartbreaking clash of rights. And on the one hand, I do think many of the examples that are brought up by the pro-life side are these rarer-than-rare examples that do not describe the experiences of most American women — anywhere near most. But on the other side I think there really are some really tricky things about the idea of unregulated abortion in this country.michelle goldbergWell we don’t have unregulated abortion in this country.david leonhardtNo, if we were to get there. In many states we have extremely regulated abortion, more regulated than I would like.ross douthatBut I mean I think we should push a little bit on this question of sort of compromises, right? Because I think, you know, again the pro-life side looks at places where the pro-choice side is in power, right? Where political liberalism is in power, be it Scandinavia or New York state. And it doesn’t see what you’re describing, Michelle. It doesn’t see a world where the pro-choice side is willing and eager to have third-trimester restrictions so long as abortion is readily available in the first two trimesters. In fact it sees situations where you have permissive laws and high abortion rates, right? I think I think there’s a conceit that the pro-choice side has that you can make all good things go together. That you can — that, “Oh, you know, pro-life laws just, you know, just, just sort of create more abortions in the end or women wait too long and so on.” And the reality is if you go state by state in the U.S. the highest abortion rates are in the places with the most permissive laws. It’s about what you would expect. And there isn’t a world where the pro-choice side takes power and suddenly they’re willing to compromise in ways that impose any restrictions at all.michelle goldbergWell right. But think about why New York passed the law that it just passed and why there was so much celebration, right? It was very specifically in reaction to Brett Kavanaugh on the Supreme Court and the sense that the Supreme Court is going to take Roe v. Wade away from us. Let’s codify all the rights that we can. And so like I said, because people in the pro-choice side don’t believe that there even is a good faith argument being made against these late term abortions. I mean —ross douthatDo you — let me — do you think there isn’t a good faith argument being made? Do you think pro-lifers don’t think that late-term abortions are worse than first trimester?michelle goldbergI do find it hard to believe that some people on the pro-life side, who in no other circumstances evince any concern for the weak or vulnerable, I do find their passion on this issue suspicious.ross douthatO.K. Can I — can I —michelle goldbergCan I just say one quick thing? I mean the fact that you could not even get pro-life people to be outraged about the water crisis in Flint which was causing an epidemic of miscarriages, right? So you have this case where, kind of, the government is causing mass fetal death and you see sort of no solidarity from the anti-abortion movement. It does make me fundamentally question their good faith concerns. Not all of them but certainly some of them.ross douthatO.K. but there we’re also dealing with the difference between the pro-life movement as sort of an institutional force within partisan politics in the U.S. and the pro-life movement as consisting of the much smaller number of Americans who are zealous about the issue. And there, you know, look, I belong to the Roman Catholic Church, right? The Roman Catholic Church has condemned Donald Trump’s border policies. It has taken what amount to left-wing positions on just about every issue related to health care and the environment for 30 or 35 years. It’s a pretty big, important institution, maybe less important than it used to be. But when when I go to church and when I read the documents put out by my Bishops Conference I don’t see an unconcern for human life outside —michelle goldbergI think that’s true. I think that — I think the Catholic Church, you’re right. And the Catholic Church just, you know particularly people within the Catholic Church who have the consistent life ethic and who also oppose the death penalty, I mean. You’re right.david leonhardtRoss, there are a substantial number of people who identify themselves as pro-life who, when faced in their own lives or the lives of someone in their family with an unintended pregnancy, change their view when it comes to themselves. They basically say, wait a second. The idea of forcing a woman, whether it’s the person themselves, because men and women have remarkably similar views on abortion, whether it’s the person herself or whether it is someone’s sister or wife. These are people who identify as pro-life but when faced with the actual situation of an unintended pregnancy basically don’t want to force the woman to carry that baby all the way to term. We’re here talking early in pregnancies. How should we think about how frequent that flip of principle to personal experience is? Because that to me is a pretty strong argument in favor of abortion rights, at least early in pregnancy.ross douthatI mean, I’ll be honest, I don’t think I’ve ever known someone who is pro-life in a sincere way who made that kind of flip. I think you get, you get that kind of flip if your pro-life sentiment is extremely casual. And you know it’s like, well you grew up in red America and you’re vaguely pro-life and then you’re confronted with reality and you flip and so on. But I mean the reality is that like, look, you know, legal abortion — like this is again sort of a difference and just sort of construction of how how we understand legal regimes, right? But legal abortion creates its own incentives, right? If you have legal abortion it’s there as a possibility and that inevitably changes how you think about it and changes how people, their sort of decision-making structure, I think.david leonhardtSo Michelle my question for you, it’s not about these edge cases, right? Which I agree with you often feel hypothetical and ludicrous. For me the most agonizing part of this, it’s around technology and it’s around something that to me starts to get close to eugenics, right? It’s around the idea that we increasingly have tests that say does this human being have Down syndrome? Does it look like it’s gonna be the perfect specimen? And I am really uncomfortable with a world where we essentially make it possible to test for the perfection of a fetus and then decide whether that fetus is gonna be allowed to live to term. I don’t pretend to know how to construct laws around that, but it makes me deeply uncomfortable with the the full notion of unrestricted abortion rights.michelle goldbergYeah, no, of course. I mean, and you know, obviously that stuff makes me uncomfortable too. I think to me the most obvious example and something I’ve written about is sex-selective abortion in Asia but in other places too, right?david leonhardtYes.michelle goldbergWhere you have basically huge gender imbalances because women pay real prices often for giving birth to a daughter or there’s real — you know, there’s real sort of material reasons why people feel like having a daughter is going to put them at a huge disadvantage. And so you have a lot of sex-selective abortion. In some cases it has replaced a tradition of female infanticide, so in that case it’s a slightly more humane alternative but it’s still — it’s a real problem. It’s an expression of misogyny. So the question then, particularly in the American context, is that something that you can regulate away through the law without sort of infringing on women’s rights to make their own decisions? Because we don’t have reason-based restrictions in this country. And so you know, this in some ways is a very conservative position to say that I think that you can find a cultural development really morally troubling without necessarily thinking that there’s a legal solution to it, right? That the solution is actually cultural. And then in as much as there is a sort of policy solution I would say it’s to make the cost of caring for children with disabilities less crushing for parents who want to do it. The reason that most people who are pregnant with a fetus that has Down syndrome have abortions are not cavalier. And so I think that we should have the, and this may be a bit of a copout but we should have the robust social supports and welfare state that would allow people who want to raise a child with Down syndrome to do so without it, without feeling like they were endangering, you know, the future of their other children, without feeling as if it was going to, you know, without feeling as if they were basically consigning themselves to a life of penury.ross douthatI would just say there’s a style of pro-life argument that relies on the possibility or the reality that women are having abortions for cavalier reasons. I think the more compelling argument around this issue is that what Down syndrome does in an extreme way, every child, every birth, every kid you have does in a profound way. To have a child is to accept a totalizing burden for decades, for basically the rest of your entire life. And in that sense what the pro-life argument is saying is that you know this is, this is not something, though, that is just that sort of imposed on us. This is the nature of the human condition and we need all of those supports, right? I think it’s, you know, the weakness of the Republican Party is that it isn’t offering enough support for the women who it wants to have babies. But the answer is to care and not to kill.david leonhardtI actually want to end by saying thank you to both of you because as someone who has a lot of questions about this and I’m not even sure what I think about aspects of this, I often feel insecure just about having a one-on-one conversation with someone who is either strongly pro-life or pro-choice and so I just am really grateful that you guys have been willing to sit and talk with each other, as well as me mostly as a bystander, about all of this. So thank you.michelle goldbergWell thank you.ross douthatThank you.david leonhardtWe’re now going to take a quick break and we’ll be back to talk about Medicare for all. Kamala Harris the Democratic senator and presidential candidate recently did something surprising. She called for the boldest version of Medicare for all. The version in which all private insurance would go away. But her remarks still sparked a debate, both between the political left and right and among progressives.senator kamala harrisI believe the solution, and I’m, and I actually feel very strongly about this, is that we need to have Medicare for all. That’s just the bottom line.david leonhardtAdvocates for her version of Medicare for all pointed to a Kaiser Family Foundation poll showing that most Americans support Medicare for all. Skeptics, and I’m one of them, noted that the support plummeted when people heard they couldn’t have private insurance under Medicare for all. Because this show is called “The Argument,” we wanted to air both sides of this issue and so we invited Diane Archer to join us. She was the founder of the Medicare Rights Center and is the president of justcareUSA.org. Michelle stepped out of the studio for this segment and she’ll be back later. So welcome, Diane, thank you for joining us.diane archerNice to be here David.david leonhardtSo can you make the case for us for the boldest version of Medicare for all, in which we replace our rickety system of private insurance with single payer health care in which everyone gets their health insurance from the government.diane archerI’m actually going to make the case for the only version of Medicare for all. There’s a lot of other versions of Medicare for more or Medicare for many. But let me first define Medicare for all. Medicare for all is federally administered health insurance that allows people to see doctors, almost all doctors, and use most hospitals anywhere in the country. Today there are 60 million people eligible for Medicare. People over 65 and people with disabilities. What Medicare for all does is it improves on Medicare. It takes away the premiums, the deductibles and the coinsurance. And it improves on benefits, adding in vision, hearing, dental and home and community-based care. And then it expands that coverage to everyone in the country.david leonhardtSo I think the heart of the debate here is there are a lot of people — I was about to say a lot of progressives but it’s actually a lot of people across the political spectrum including conservatives — who are in favor of expanded government health insurance. I’m in favor of that, right? But once we get to this idea that Senator Harris spelled out where she — well I appreciated her honesty. She says, I’m in favor of getting rid of private health insurance. To me that’s a political pipe dream. We’re just never going to get it. This isn’t just about polls. We saw Bill Clinton’s health care plan fail because people thought they were going to lose their health care. We saw that was the main attack on Obama’s health care reform. And so this idea that somehow we can improve the health insurance system by taking away people’s health insurance, it may be true in some sort of political laboratory but it’s never gonna happen. And so to me it’s kind of an unforced error for Democrats to be talking about it.diane archerActually I think it’s the only thing they should be talking about, because what we have today is a system that’s dysfunctional. The costs are out of control. They’re unsustainable. And people aren’t able to get the care they need. What we know now, from two big research projects about how Medicare for all would work from a financial perspective, is that people would be paying less for their health care. About 80 percent of Americans would be paying less for their health care than they’re paying today, and national health spending would go down by conservative estimates by two trillion dollars over 10 years. By other estimates as much as five trillion dollars over 10 years. So we can afford it. It makes sense. It’s the right way to go. Any compromise position doesn’t allow us to drive down the costs and to ensure people access to care.david leonhardtSo I actually agree with a lot of the substance of what you’re laying out but I almost think that the substance isn’t the question here. I cannot fathom a world in which we persuade huge numbers of Americans that they do not have a right to private insurance. And so what I want is a better health care system. And I worry that the push for mandatory Medicare for all, or as you call it the only Medicare for all, is just a route to failure where we don’t actually get to keep improving our health system and trying to make people’s lives better. So how do you think — why am I being too cynical? How does the political case work for persuading people that it’s okay that they don’t have the right to buy private health insurance?diane archerWell let me step back a second because you mentioned earlier the recent Kaiser survey showing that 56 percent of the public supported Medicare for all. What you didn’t mention is that 67 percent of the public support Medicare for all when they’re told that it eliminates premiums, deductibles and coinsurance. And 71 percent of the public support Medicare for all when they’re told that it guarantees health care as a human right. No one asked people whether they supported Medicare for all if it did away with all cost share and guaranteed health care is a human right, and gave them access to most doctors and hospitals throughout the country. My bet is that if you asked them that you would have even higher numbers in the 80 to 90 percent range. So what they really want, as I see it, is they want the ability to go to the doctor without worry about the cost. And that’s what Medicare for all gives them.ross douthatI mean it seems like the sales pitch being offered here is basically that Medicare for all will be wonderful because it will cost much, much less than our current system and deliver much, much more, right? And I think it — to most, to most people.diane archerIt will cost a little less.ross douthatA little less. OK.diane archerAnd it will give everyone coverage at less cost.david leonhardtYou’re clearly not running for office.ross douthatSo I’m curious — no that was that was a very admirable concession. But one of the things that we see in other countries, Canada and Europe, that have systems comparable to this is that they do succeed in driving down costs in certain ways relative to the U.S., but they do it in part because of dramatic cultural differences in people’s expectations for what the system will cover. If you look at Canada, for instance, you have sort of an assumption that there are certain, you know, expensive procedures that maybe you’re gonna have to go to the U.S. to get. If you look at how much doctors are paid, how much hospitals make in European countries, there’s a big difference between the U.S. and here. The U.S. has a culture of consumerist entitlement that applies to what patients expect, what doctors expect to make, what hospitals expect to make and so on. And I have a certain skepticism that if you layer on top of this culture of medical entitlement a system where the sales pitch is, “This will finally pay for all the things that you find too expensive right now,” that you’re actually going to be able to drive down costs.diane archerA couple of points. First of all we do have an almost 55 year track record with Medicare bringing down costs and giving people the care they need. And what we also know is we have a Koch brothers-funded study out of the Mercatus Center, very conservative —ross douthatSome of my best friends work at the Mercatus Center.diane archerThere you go. There you go. And they’re taking into consideration the fact that people will be using the system more. So what we know is that other wealthy countries have universal health care and they also have far better health outcomes overall than we do at half the cost.david leonhardtAnd the main reason is that we would eliminate wasteful care? Or it’s that we would reduce the profits of drug companies and the salaries of doctors?diane archerGood question. So we reduce the cost a few ways. One way is we get rid of a lot of the administrative waste in the system and some have estimated that to be about $500 billion a year. And then we have the federal government negotiating on behalf of all 330 million of us and that will bring some fairness and rationality to the prices that we’re paying for health care today. So those two together will save a lot of money to the system. Obviously also getting commercial health insurers out of the mix will take their profits out of the system and bring down costs further.ross douthatIt seems to me that, that you know, the Democrats can only really have one or two priorities and you can make an existential case — I’m appealing to you here David — that their top priorities should be climate change. And I think you can make a financial case that their top priority should be just a little more redistribution directly of cash, which could be spent on medical bills or other things. And after the Obamacare experience both of those, were I a liberal, would seem more attractive than another big health care push right now. So what what do either of you make of that argument?david leonhardtI share that. Meaning I — to me the idea that the next time there’s a Democratic congress and president, which could be 2021 or could be later than that, the idea that they are going to go after the same issue that Bill Clinton went after and failed and Barack Obama went after and I think made a lot of progress, not enough but a lot of progress, to me would be a mistake. And I would much rather see continued push around progress on health care, but if the Democrats made Medicare for all their number one push and failed, and failed to make progress on climate, on democracy rights or on inequality I would think it would be really, really unfortunate.diane archerIt would be unfortunate. We have to win. But we know that the top or one of the top policy issues among Americans is health care costs.david leonhardtYep.diane archerThat is what everybody is talking about. And Ross I know — I’ve read you make the point that more health care doesn’t necessarily deliver better health. But last week I spoke to a nurse with ulcerative colitis and her daughter has gastritis. She works full time, family of five. Her husband works full time their income is $80 thousand a year. And she told me she had to back burner treatment for her ulcerative colitis because her daughter’s gastritis had to come first. She has maxed out her credit card debt. Her ulcerative colitis needs to be treated and she is going to get worse and the system is going to spend more, ultimately, taking care of her because she isn’t treating it now and she can’t. And that’s a choice we shouldn’t be making. That’s a choice we shouldn’t be forcing anybody to make in this country. We’re the wealthiest country in the world. There is a way to give everybody affordable health care at lower cost or even if you want to say it about the same cost. Why wouldn’t we do it?ross douthatBut what’s wrong — so can I just ask what — does that woman you’re talking about have health insurance?diane archerShe —oh yes! She has health insurance. She has health insurance. Good health insurance. But there is a $3,000 deductible and a 30 percent coinsurance payment to see the doctors and to use the hospital.ross douthatSo I guess, I mean again, putting on let’s say my Sherrod Brown hat, right? Maybe you would say, “Look, we’re going to have a policy that, you know, puts that woman in the range for a larger earned-income tax credit or, depending on how old her daughter is, a larger child tax credit. And she has five or ten thousand more dollars in disposable income. And in that situation she can pay the $3,000 copay but another person who, you know, has a different financial difficulty that doesn’t flow from the health care costs will also benefit and someone who might, you know, end up spending money on unnecessary care won’t. Right? I mean I guess, what’s the case for that woman’s costs as opposed to, you know, the guy who lost his job and can’t pay for his kid’s day care or something?diane archerI think the thing about health insurance is that it’s there to protect you when you’re healthy and when you’re sick, and nobody knows when they’re going to need expensive health care. Right? Tomorrow I could be in a car accident. I could be diagnosed with cancer. Those bills are a lot more than 5 or 10 thousand dollars. When you go to the hospital these days it’s more like 20, 40, 60, 100 thousand dollars. So an earned-income tax credit is not going to carry you through.ross douthatRight, is not going to pay for that. I agree.diane archerThe beauty, the elegance of Medicare is that it pools risk, right? It brings everybody together and then it broadly distributes costs across everybody. So if you’re healthy it’s not spending money, but if you’re sick you’re not burdened with additional costs as you are and our commercial health care system.ross douthatBut part of what’s going to happen under your system, presumably, is that we’ll have this same conversation, you know, 10 years on in Bernie Sanders’s second term, right? When this — when this is passed into law. And there will be some cancer treatments that your system, if it really is going to drive down costs, isn’t going to pay for. You’re going to have some people who are in difficult situations with experimental treatments and, you know, under any reasonable Medicare for all system — European or Canadian — part of the way it saves money is by saying we’re not going to pay for those things. And my guess is that if you have a system like that, where everybody is paying in much more than they do now in taxes to get this system, and there’s this expectation, this promise of care, that there’s going to be constant political pressure against the Medicare bureaucracy saying, “You have to pay for this. You have to pay for that. You have to pay for that.” Which will be stronger than against the insurance companies right now. Do you think Medicare for all will be able to say no effectively to treatments?diane archerI think today we’re saying no every day to thousands of people, tens of thousands of people who need these treatments all the time. That’s the M.O. People can’t get the treatments they need here. Yes, obviously we can’t pay for everything that everyone needs at astronomical costs. But again Medicare for all is going to do one thing that’s really important which is to set fair prices for services. Right now prices are really, kind of, insane.ross douthatThey are insane, yes.diane archerThey’re crazy.david leonhardtLet’s end here. So it’s 2021 and the Democrats actually have taken both the House and the Senate as well as the presidency. You obviously know what the the other side is going to say, right? You’re restricting choice. You’re taking away people’s insurance. We saw it with Clinton. We saw a little bit of it with Obama. So can you give us a sense how is it that the Medicare for all side wins this time? What’s the case they make?diane archerO.K., so it’s education. So let’s start with taking away insurance. I would say this: If people don’t like losing their insurance, then they should embrace Medicare for all. Here’s why: Every year we’re often forced to lose our insurance when our employer changes insurers. If we lose our job, if we switch jobs, if our insurance decides to change the terms and change doctors. So we are effectively all losing our insurance all the time. With Medicare for all you get to pick your doctors that you want to see, use the hospitals you want to use and it’s guaranteed health care for the rest of your life. You have that continuity of care. So people don’t yet understand that, but I think once they do they will embrace it. I think that’s what we need to do. We need to educate people that they’re going to pay less, they’re going to get more and they’re going to be able to see the doctors they want to see when they need to, without insurance companies coming between them and the needs that they have.david leonhardtWell we really appreciate your coming on because we know we have a lot of listeners who share your view and so we wanted to make sure we gave a full airing to the pro-Medicare, pro-Medicare for all side. And I remain skeptical that it’s going to happen but I also think your side is winning. I think you guys have moved this debate a long way in a relatively short time. So when Medicare for all actually happens we hope you’ll come back and celebrate.diane archerI would love to. Thank you so much.david leonhardtMichelle is back with us in the studio now and it is time for our weekly recommendation, something to take your mind off of contemporary politics. Ross, this week is your turn.ross douthatI mean, I don’t think this is going to count because I’m going to bring it back to contemporary politics but I’ve been reading the new doorstop of an English-language biography of Charles de Gaulle by Julian Jackson.michelle goldbergI just need to say that Ross is younger than me. [ALL LAUGH]ross douthatListen. So — so this is — this is — this is a very, this is a good book. I’m recommending it without having finished it yet. And I read big books slowly even though I’m very, very young. [MICHELLE LAUGHS] But what’s interesting about de Gaulle is that ultimately his whole project was to take this country, France, that had become so polarized between Catholics and secularists, liberals and conservatives, monarchists and socialists and so on and tried to sort of pull back together some kind of common sense of national identity that would enable the nation to, you know, sort of revive itself in the aftermath of Vichy and World War II. And reading it, it’s hard not to see some resonances to contemporary American politics. Like there is a sense in which we are, you know, without, fortunately, the guillotines, the Paris communes and so on. There is a sense in which we resemble the sort of hyper-polarized late 19th- and early 20th-century French society. And there is a sense in which de Gaulle’s project of like figuring out how you could make Catholic monarchists and the heirs of the French Revolution have some sense of their country’s common history that would bind them together is sort of our project too. And of course de Gaulle did this, you know, in the aftermath of a Nazi conquest which hopefully is not going to be the situation in which we find ourselves in the future. Anyway, it seems relevant.michelle goldbergWait now I feel bad for making fun of you because now it sounds interesting. [ALL LAUGH]ross douthatIt is! It’s very — it’s interesting. I mean de Gaulle — the book has a great — sort of great dry tone. Like de Gaulle gets captured in World War I and he keeps escaping from German prison camps. And the author basically like, he could never get very far because you know he was like 6 foot 5, right? So he just stands out in any in any escape he attempts.david leonhardtSo again what’s the title and author?ross douthatIt’s just “de Gaulle” and it’s Julian Jackson.david leonhardtExcellent. Thank you Ross. That’s our show for this week. Thank you as always for listening. If you have thoughts, ideas for segments, criticisms, leave us a voicemail at 347-915-4324, and we may play you on the air. You can also e-mail us with your thoughts at argument@nytimes.com. If you like what you hear we hope you will leave a rating or review in Apple podcasts. This week’s show is produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media and edited by Lacy Roberts. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn. We had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett and Ian Prasad Philbrick. Our theme was composed by Alison Leyton-Brown. See you next week.Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Apple Podcasts | RadioPublic | Stitcher | Spotify | Google PlayThis week on “The Argument,” the columnists debate abortion. Michelle Goldberg picks apart conservatives’ response to efforts in New York and Virginia to expand access and argues that even ostensibly limited restrictions are part of a broader quest to criminalize the practice. Ross Douthat thinks that in most cases abortion is too abhorrent to remain legal and teases out the various arguments within the wider anti-abortion movement. And David Leonhardt notes that abortion ranks among the political issues on which Americans appear to be genuinely split.Then, could the Democrats’ new favorite slogan — “Medicare for All” — actually work in practice? Diane Archer, president of JustCareUSA.org, joins David and Ross to discuss the political hurdles and potential upsides to universal health care.And finally, Ross has de Gaulle to make a doorstop of a biography recommendation.Background Reading:Ross on the New York and Virginia abortion bills and the dangers of more health care debatesDavid on public opinion about abortion and the Democrats’ Medicare for All problemMichelle on the right’s response to the Virginia abortion bill and Trump’s State of the Union abortion liesI’ve been an Op-Ed columnist since 2009, and I write about politics, religion, pop culture, sociology and the places where they all intersect. I’m a Catholic and a conservative, in that order, which means that I’m against abortion and critical of the sexual revolution, but I tend to agree with liberals that the Republican Party is too friendly to the rich. I was against Donald Trump in 2016 for reasons specific to Donald Trump, but in general I think the populist movements in Europe and America have legitimate grievances and I often prefer the populists to the “reasonable” elites. I’ve written books about Harvard, the G.O.P., American Christianity and Pope Francis; I’m working on one about decadence. Benedict XVI was my favorite pope. I review movies for National Review and have strong opinions about many prestige television shows. I have three small children, two girls and a boy, and I live in New Haven with my wife.I’ve been an Op-Ed columnist at The New York Times since 2017, writing mainly about politics, ideology and gender. These days people on the right and the left both use “liberal” as an epithet, but that’s basically what I am, though the nightmare of Donald Trump’s presidency has radicalized me and pushed me leftward. I’ve written three books, including one, in 2006, about the danger of right-wing populism in its religious fundamentalist guise. (My other two were about the global battle over reproductive rights and, in a brief detour from politics, about an adventurous Russian émigré who helped bring yoga to the West.) I love to travel; a long time ago, after my husband and I eloped, we spent a year backpacking through Asia. Now we live in Brooklyn with our son and daughter.I’ve worked at The Times since 1999 and have been an Op-Ed columnist since 2016. I caught the journalism bug a very long time ago — first as a little kid in the late 1970s who loved reading the Boston Globe sports section and later as a teenager working on my high school and college newspapers. I discovered that when my classmates and I put a complaint in print, for everyone to see, school administrators actually paid attention. I’ve since worked as a metro reporter at The Washington Post and a writer at BusinessWeek magazine. At The Times, I started as a reporter in the business section and have also been a Times Magazine staff writer, the Washington bureau chief and the founding editor of The Upshot.My politics are left of center. But I’m also to the right of many Times readers. I think education reform has accomplished a lot. I think two-parent families are good for society. I think progressives should be realistic about the cultural conservatism that dominates much of this country. Most of all, however, I worry deeply about today’s Republican Party, which has become dangerously extreme. This country faces some huge challenges — inequality, climate change, the rise of China — and they’ll be very hard to solve without having both parties committed to the basic functioning of American democracy.Tune in on iTunes, Google Play, Spotify, Stitcher or wherever you listen to podcasts. Tell us what you think at argument@nytimes.com. Follow Michelle Goldberg (@michelleinbklyn), Ross Douthat (@DouthatNYT) and David Leonhardt (@DLeonhardt) on Twitter. This week’s show is produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media and edited by Lacy Roberts. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn. We had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett and Ian Prasad Philbrick. Our theme is composed by Allison Leyton-Brown.Advertisement