https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/28/realestate/a-zip-code-by-any-other-name.html
A ZIP Code, by Any Other Name - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1823
AdvertisementSupported byLiving InBy Elsa BrennerRebecca Salko moved to Larchmont in 1988. Her family’s first house, in the square mile that constitutes the village proper, was a three-bedroom colonial costing $480,000. Several years later, with two children in tow, she and her husband traded up, paying $1 million for a five-bedroom colonial in a part of the village called the Manor, which is known for its elaborate Victorians and other 19th-century homes, and which offers expansive views of the crenulated Long Island Sound. Ms. Salko, now divorced and teaching nursery school, sold the second house, which she and her husband had renovated, four years ago for about three times what they paid. She lives in a four-bedroom Cape that cost $750,000. She described the village, with its picket fences and colorfully trimmed houses, as “a walkable community and a perfect place to bring up a family.” These days, as an empty nester (her son and daughter are in college), she continues to find it a neighborly place where shopkeepers know her by name. Jonathan and Valentine Gelman, both in their 40s and former residents of Manhattan, own a house within the same ZIP code, but beyond the point where the New Haven line of the Metro-North Railroad and Interstate 95 separate the village proper from the unincorporated portion of the town of Mamaroneck. Like many other residents with young children — the couple have a 2-year-old son — they sought out the 10538 ZIP code for two reasons: its well-regarded elementary schools, and its relatively short commute to Manhattan. They bought a five-bedroom three-and-a-half-bath 1931 Tudor for about $1.5 million, but not without some initial hesitation on the part of Ms. Gelman, a director for a fund-raising group in Manhattan.“My wife is a city girl,” said Mr. Gelman, a computer consultant for a firm in Jersey City, “but she was swayed by the health benefits of living away from the city, especially for the baby’s sake. I said to her, ‘Look, there’s no soot on the windows here,’ and she was convinced.”11 PhotosView Slide Show ›As in much of Westchester, where certain enclaves have high property values and taxes, the population of almost 17,000 (about 5,900 in the village) is overwhelmingly white, although a federally mandated remedy, in the form of new affordable housing countywide, is in the works. Median household income is $210,521. But those statistics have not shielded its shopping area from the effects of the recession in recent years. Empty storefronts are not an unusual sight along Palmer Avenue, one of the busier thoroughfares. These days “of course it’s easy to park in Larchmont,” said David Nadelson, the owner of Aroma, a coffee shop that opened 22 years ago. “A lot of the stores that used to be here not so long ago are gone.”Still, Mr. Nadelson’s business has survived, despite the Starbucks across the street. And new businesses are opening. Judy Graham, the owner of Pink on Palmer, a bath shop in business since 2002, also owns Clutch, a handbag and jewelry store, and the Manor Home, a gift boutique. Meanwhile, the contractor on a $1.7 million downtown project, which began in the spring, has since been declared in default over management and safety issues, said Mayor Anne H. McAndrews. Village lawyers are working to restart the project. An earlier version of this article misstated the highway number of the Boston Post Road. It is Route 1, not Route 100.What You’ll FindFanning out to the south between the Metro-North Railroad station and the Boston Post Road (also known as Route 1), houses on lots of 0.25 acres and smaller line a maze of streets. To the south of the highway is the area known as the Manor, adjoining what many residents consider the community’s pride and joy: Larchmont Manor Park, 13 acres of walking paths, gazebos, benches and stretches of grass along more than 5,000 feet of shoreline. The park, which is open to the public, is privately owned by the Larchmont Manor Park Society.The unincorporated section of Mamaroneck, north of the railroad tracks, has several tree-lined neighborhoods with a predominance of prewar Tudors on lots of a third of an acre or larger.As part of a settlement reached with the federal government in 2009 to help desegregate housing in heavily white parts of Westchester like Larchmont, officials agreed to build a total 750 units of affordable housing and to advertise them aggressively among nonwhites. So far, says William Balter, the project’s developer, 51 units are planned in the village, 46 of which count toward the settlement total. Construction is to start in the next few months.According to the Mamaroneck assessor’s office, the 10538 ZIP code has 4,596 single-family homes; 257 condominium units in four buildings; and 1,027 co-ops in 19 buildings. Ground was broken this spring on a fifth condo, in the unincorporated area, called the Cambium, which is to have 139 units, a few designated affordable.Mark Nadler, the principal broker and owner of Prudential Centennial Realty, says co-ops and condos are popular among buyers drawn to Larchmont who can’t afford a single-family home. Or, as Michael Flake, a resident who commutes to a law practice in White Plains, put it, “You get more bang for your buck with a co-op.” Eight years ago, when he and his wife, Jessica, a personal assistant to a Manhattan family, learned they were expecting twins, they decided to relocate from Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, into a co-op in the unincorporated section. They live in a three-bedroom that cost $500,000.“We have a Larchmont address and the ZIP code 10538,” Mr. Flake said. “Really, the only difference between the unincorporated part and the village is that you have to know which police department to call in an emergency. We call the town of Mamaroneck’s.”What You’ll PayThe median sale price of a co-op from January through June was $173,000; five years ago it was $229,000, Mr. Nadler said, noting that it was an opportune time for first-time buyers to enter Larchmont’s housing market. As of July 5, there were listings for 29 co-ops, ranging from $81,500 for a studio, to $699,500 for a three-bedroom.Annual property taxes on a $1.7 million house now on the market are $42,576; in neighboring New Rochelle, on a comparable house, the taxes are $29,953.The median sale price of a single-family home was $1.05 million at the end of the second quarter, versus $1.11 million for the same period in 2008. Countywide for the same period this year, the median for a single-family residence was $600,000. A multiple listings search in early July turned up 63 listings, ranging from a $429,000 four-bedroom two-bath to a $16.2 million for a seven-bedroom six-bath with three half baths.What to DoThe Larchmont area is rich with green space. One popular spot, Flint Park, has tennis courts, baseball and soccer fields and basketball courts. Another, Lorenzen Park, is home to Little League baseball and soccer teams. And Willow/Woodbine Park offers nature observation areas along the Premium River.The SchoolsOf the four elementary schools in the district, two serve Larchmont, one serves both Larchmont and Mamaroneck, and one is entirely for Mamaroneck students.On state tests last year, 86 percent of fourth-graders met or exceeded standards in English, 91 percent in math, versus 59 and 69 percent statewide.Total enrollment, including students at  Hommocks Middle School and Mamaroneck High School, is about 5,100. Of the 367 graduates in June, 301 are to attend four-year colleges. SAT averages last year were 555 in reading, 572 in math and 560 in writing, versus 496, 514 and 488 statewide.The CommuteMetro-North’s New Haven line trains take about 35 minutes to reach Grand Central Terminal during peak hours. A one-way ticket costs $11.25 during rush hour; a monthly ticket costs $249. There are four public parking lots, most for permit-holders. The HistoryDuring the 1700s, Quaker refugees from New England settled in the Larchmont area, followed by wealthy New Yorkers, according to the village historical society. By the end of the 18th century, Larchmont was known as a summer getaway for well-heeled city folk.Advertisement