http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/02/arts/spike-lee-enhances-jerrod-carmichael-and-katt-williams.html
Spike Lee Enhances Jerrod Carmichael and Katt Williams - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1231
AdvertisementSupported byOn ComedyBy Jason ZinomanSpike Lee’s stand-up specials are not Spike Lee joints. Where his feature films have a distinctive style, his direction of comedy has a more flexible but no less vital aesthetic. By capturing the crackling energy of live performance while sensitively adjusting to the particular star, he makes stand-up movies that feel like narrative dramas. Two new releases announce him as the greatest director of the form. “Jerrod Carmichael: Love at the Store,” to be shown Saturday on HBO, has the quiet, anxious mood of a thoughtful coming-of-age story, which may be apt, since it will introduce many to this sharp 27-year-old comic. Katt Williams, 41, is more experienced and manic, and Mr. Lee shot his HBO special, “Priceless: Afterlife,” which was shown in August, with the kinetic spark of an action movie.To argue that Mr. Lee simply matches form to content sells him short. In all his works chronicling live performance (including the musical “Passing Strange“ and Mike Tyson’s one-man show on Broadway), an assured style emerges. He depicts the audience and the performer in a relationship (very few cutaway shots to people laughing). His camera takes the ant’s eye view, a striking perspective that makes the artist look larger than life. If he has a signature shot, it’s from behind the head, showing us the silhouette in front of a blaring spotlight. Mr. Lee doesn’t just match the pace of a joke. His aim is to make a star. As a genre, the stand-up special has never been treated with much respect. The 1979 classic “Richard Pryor: Live in Concert,” which introduced many fans to the genius of this influential artist, is one of the most important movies ever made, but can you even name the director? (It’s Jeff Margolis.) So it’s no surprise that stand-up filmmaking has a pretty dreadful history. George Carlin and Sam Kinison performances have been filmed as if they were high school musicals. Behind these blandly shot movies is, I suspect, a perfectly rational insecurity about the ability to recreate the peculiar feel of live performance. People who see a lot of live comedy know how different the experience is from seeing it on a screen. As a result, perhaps, some directors lower their ambitions. Mr. Lee exposed the timidity of that strategy in “The Original Kings of Comedy“ (2000), a virtuosic concert movie capturing the riotous, arena-rock energy of a bill featuring Steve Harvey, D. L. Hughley, Cedric the Entertainer and Bernie Mac. What made the movie so compelling was that Mr. Lee filmed these comics the way Brian De Palma shoots a suspense scene, with swirling, dreamy camerawork that aggressively tells us where to look.When Mr. Harvey pantomimes a kid playing hide and seek, the camera freezes and moves behind him so we can see the look on his face when he turns. Mr. Lee adds slowed-down blurry effects to Cedric the Entertainer’s arms during a physical comedy bit involving “The Matrix.” Mr. Lee’s technical tricks can be indulgent. His “Kobe Bryant: Doin’ Work” (2009), which trained 30 cameras on this Laker star, was almost a parody of the sports world’s camera-angle fetish. But Mr. Lee takes a more stripped-down, restrained tack in his new specials. Mr. Williams, who arrives onstage following a cloud of smoke and a caged tiger, does not need any help creating excitement. Dashing around the stage in a tuxedo, he’s a whirligig of a performer, and Mr. Lee gives us as many close-ups as possible. And when Mr. Williams runs toward one side of the stage, Mr. Lee swings the camera from the opposite direction, matching his momentum. When the comic slows down, the director joins him, as Mr. Williams mixes jokes about race and sex with knowing ones about his history with the law. “I can’t be mad at everybody,” he says, explaining why he won’t skewer Paula Deen. “I’m on my fifth second chance right now.”Mr. Carmichael is a more static, soft-spoken presence. His joke writing is more skilled than his performance, which adopts a pointedly endearing pose. Like Mr. Williams, he jokes about how our culture doesn’t really care about tragedy, saying we fake outrage so we don’t look like monsters. “Am I going to forget where I came from?” he asks. “Of course I am. Like almost immediately.” Mr. Carmichael is first shown boyishly giggling, studiously looking at his notepad. When he walks to the stage of the Comedy Store in Los Angeles, Mr. Lee puts the camera directly above him, a rare move. Like any storied comedy club, the space is a bit of a dump with a makeshift look. Spike Lee captures its dirty old Sunset Strip glamour without wallowing in it. The small room is lit to look less like a dive than a void whose blackness is interrupted by loud red neon signs on the wall that shout the names of stars like Robin Williams and Pryor. Mr. Lee emphasizes these signs so much that they start to seem like co-stars. Mr. Lee is telling a story here (that pays off in a pointed coda) through visual language, introducing us to an up-and-comer aspiring to greatness. One week after watching this special, I saw Mr. Carmichael in a small room in Brooklyn. He appeared slightly listless. He was trying out new material as well as doing his more honed bits, so he might have been more focused on refining jokes than appealing to the audience. But it was the first time I ever saw a stand-up comic and thought: He seemed more live in the movie. Advertisement