https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/14/t-magazine/raouls-new-york-restaurant-history.html
The New York Restaurant Where (Almost) Nothing Has Changed Since 1975 - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
596
AdvertisementSupported byThe 212Raoul’s in SoHo is less riotous now than during the restaurant’s ’70s and ’80s heyday. But its charm remains much the same.By Reggie NadelsonIn this new series for T, the author Reggie Nadelson revisits New York institutions that have defined cool for decades, from time-honored restaurants to unsung dives.Before there was Balthazar or Lucky Strike or Odeon, there was Raoul’s.In the early ’70s, you’d be out of luck if you wanted to get food late at night in SoHo, except for at a couple of bars and maybe Dave’s Luncheonette down on Canal and Broadway. Then, in 1975, a pair of Alsatian brothers, Serge and Guy Raoul, opened a bistro in what had been an old Italian restaurant on Prince Street. They served steak frites and poireaux vinaigrette, oysters and duck — and plenty of red wine.At first, locals dribbled in. Later, the word got out and even the tourists were admitted. There were artists, actors and filmmakers. Everyone talked art and indie film; everyone smoked and did drugs and drank all night. Being there, you knew you had somehow joined some inner New York circle. When I moved to SoHo, in the ’80s, I spent a lot of nights at Raoul’s.Scores of other places have opened in SoHo since then. Some of them, like Balthazar, have even aspired to Raoul’s cool. But I hadn’t paid much attention to Raoul’s until recently, when I noticed little knots of people standing outside the restaurant just before 5:30 p.m., waiting for it to open. It had always been a late-night kind of joint, so I stopped in to see what was going on and fell into a vat of nostalgia.The white neon sign still glows in the window. Inside the narrow space is the same long mahogany bar with its mirrors and Art Deco-ish lights. Black-and-cream booths still line the walls, which are plastered with photographs and paintings of nudes. Django Reinhardt was on the sound system, providing that certain French something, and I took a seat at the bar. In the dim light, there was a strong whiff of SoHo when it was young, when artists squatted in abandoned industrial buildings and punk was the soundtrack.In his memoir, “Downtown: My Manhattan,” the writer Pete Hamill calls nostalgia New York’s most powerful emotion. The city moves at warp speed, we tear it down, then yearn for what’s gone. “You take away one picture and people yell,” says Karim Raoul, Serge’s son who now runs the restaurant, of his intermittent attempts to update the space. Karim, who is 40, tall and charming, went to N.Y.U. and set out to be a documentary filmmaker. But restaurants are in his blood; his grandparents ran a brasserie in Alsace and he lives in an apartment above Raoul’s. When he was a kid, the restaurant’s legendary maître d’, Rob Jones, took him for walks. “We’d go around SoHo and spray-paint all the dog poop gold,” Karim says.At night, Jones, wearing a wig, would descend the restaurant’s winding wrought-iron staircase to do a Dusty Springfield imitation. It was always a party. Jones assigned tables according to how friendly — not how famous — you were. He died in 1989, and at his memorial, which was packed, somebody noted that Jones always said, “I have to get New York through the ’80s.”In 2010, Karim’s father, Serge, had a stroke, the general manager quit and Karim took over. “I was terrified I’d screw up,” he says. He didn’t screw it up. He’s shrewd enough to understand the potency of the past while also recognizing that a secure future needs subtle changes. Today, the food is better. The oysters are still good, and so is the signature steak au poivre, thick as your hand. But now there are crab beignets and soft-shell crabs, too, and on weekends there is brunch. In the 1970s, nobody in SoHo was awake in time for brunch.About those crowds outside: It seems they were waiting for the burger. Topped with au poivre sauce, gooey Saint-André cheese, wilted watercress and cornichons — and served with fries and more au poivre sauce to dunk them in — it inspired the late food writer Josh Ozersky, in a 2014 piece for Esquire, to call it “the best hamburger in America.”Raoul’s chef, David Honeysett, eager to avoid the frenzy, produces only 12 burgers each evening. Twelve. Like apostles, or the days of Christmas. This scarcity has, of course, made the Raoul’s burger as desirable as, say, a Cronut, a response that surprised Karim Raoul. But an entry into New York’s foodie folklore isn’t bad for business. The lines grew, and the famous and nearly famous arrived in ever greater numbers. In the 1980s, celebrities were artists, writers and people in drag who danced on the bar. These days, a more prosperous, pretty and well-behaved breed frequents Raoul’s, one that includes Jennifer Lawrence, George and Amal Clooney and Rachel Maddow.New York exists in layers, like an archaeological dig. At Raoul’s even in the 1970s, you could sense an earlier time, when it had been Luizzi’s, the Italian restaurant. Lynne Reiser, an artist who came to SoHo in the ’60s, recalls, “My son was 8, and if he felt hungry he would go into Luizzi’s and order a plate of ravioli, and they’d call me and I’d go pay.” On the evening I visited, a young woman at the bar, asked why she was at Raoul’s, said it’s the way she thought of old New York as a kid in Wisconsin. She doesn’t care if it’s an illusion or not; this is the New York of her dreams.Maybe Raoul’s isn’t quite as louche as it once was. Maybe there’s no longer a Rob to get us through the night. But as I left, Chris Sessions, the manager, a tall man in a red shirt, was taking pictures of a family who had been in to eat. He’s handsome. He was smiling. He exuded the kind of charm, and perhaps naughtiness, that makes him feel like Raoul’s.I walked the four blocks home. It was after midnight, and on West Broadway I could just hear the echo of the chicken man. In the 1970s, he sold large yellow plush chickens off a supermarket cart. I still have one at home, where it’s molting on my closet floor. Above me, SoHo’s cast-iron buildings, once filthy with the grime and graffiti in that past we now yearn for, gleamed under a summer moon like poured cream.Advertisement