https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/19/books/review/crime-perfect-nanny-leila-slimani.html
Keep Watch Over Your Children: Danger Lurks Everywhere - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2176
AdvertisementSupported byCrimeBy Marilyn StasioWhen a character in a crime novel snaps and kills a child, it’s usually a mother stressed beyond endurance. In Leila Slimani’s unnerving cautionary tale, THE PERFECT NANNY (Penguin, paper, $16), subtly translated by Sam Taylor, we know from the outset that it’s a beloved and trusted nanny who murders the two children in her care. That’s pretty radical for a domestic thriller; but what’s more remarkable about this unconventional novel (which was awarded France’s prestigious Prix Goncourt) is the author’s intimate analysis of the special relationship between a mother and a nanny.[This book was selected as one of The New York Times Book Review’s 10 Best Books of 2018. For the rest of the list, click here.]Myriam and Paul, the Parisian couple who hire Louise to help care for their son and daughter, are delighted to discover that she’s “a miracle worker” who cleans, reorganizes the household and even cooks delicious meals. “Nothing rots, nothing expires” in Louise’s kitchen. At first, they bask in their unexpected comfort, “like spoiled children, like purring cats.” Much too late, Myriam realizes that the new nanny may not be entirely benevolent: “She is Vishnu, the nurturing divinity, jealous and protective.” But already Louise “has embedded herself so deeply in their lives that it now seems impossible to remove her.” Despite Myriam’s fears, Louise has no intention of replacing her as the woman of the house; rather, in her pathological loneliness, the nanny increasingly fantasizes that she has become a de facto member of the family.Slimani writes devastatingly perceptive character studies. Dropping their children at day care, the mothers are “rushed and sad,” the children “little tyrants.” She also raises painful questions. Could Myriam be projecting onto her nanny her own forbidden desire to be free of her children and their insatiable needs? (“They’re eating me alive,” she thinks.) Is there an element of racial prejudice in the Moroccan-born Myriam’s attitude toward her French nanny? Is Louise’s pitiless act the transference of her forbidden feelings about her privileged employer? One thing is clear: Loneliness can drive you crazy, and extreme loneliness can make you homicidal.♦The intense thrills of Thomas Perry’s THE BOMB MAKER (Mysterious Press, $26) are almost unbearable. After sweating through a scene in which a member of the Los Angeles Police Department Bomb Squad narrowly escapes a lethal explosion, we’re knocked back by the loss of 14 team technicians — half the squad — who are blown to smithereens. “Bombs were acts of murder,” Perry writes, but “they were also jokes on you, riddles the bomber hoped were too tough for you.”Dick Stahl, who steps in to head the depleted squad, doesn’t get the joke, but he goes mano a mano with the abominable riddler, whose clear intention is to destroy those who respond to his devilishly clever booby traps. There seems to be no pattern to the placement of these “well-designed, insidious and psychologically astute” devices, which turn up at a gas station, a school cafeteria and a hospital ward. Before they go off, the tension is killing. And when they do, the damage is spectacular.♦Driving up and down Utah’s desolate Route 117 with the trucker Ben Jones is an education. LULLABY ROAD (Crown, $26), James Anderson’s second novel (after “The Never-Open Desert Diner”), introduces us to more of the “desert rats, hardscrabble ranchers and other assorted exiles” who choose to live off the grid and depend on Ben’s Desert Moon Delivery Service for food and water and the occasional luxury, like soap. Some of Ben’s customers are deep thinkers like Roy Cuthbert, who suggests holding Second Amendment Days (“with a huge gun show and fast-draw competition”) to save the town of Rockmuse from sinking into the desert sands. Other, more desperate people, like Pedro, the tire man at the Stop ‘n’ Gone Truck Stop, trust him to transport a small child and a large dog in his 28-foot tractor-trailer rig. Ben is nothing if not a decent man, and Anderson rewards him with a deadly adventure and the most poetic prose this side of Salt Lake City.♦Karen Ellis’s A MAP OF THE DARK (Mulholland/Little, Brown, $26) is a valiant, if unsuccessful attempt to contain an intensely personal narrative within the structure of a traditional police procedural. Special Agent Elsa Myers of the F.B.I.’s Child Abduction Rapid Deployment division is assigned to the case of 17-year-old Ruby Haverstock, who went missing after finishing her shift at a cafe in Queens. Even from the little we learn about her, Ruby seems like a clever, resourceful girl.For some reason that isn’t made clear, this particular case awakens Myers’s memories of mistreatment at the hands of her unstable and abusive mother. That may shed some light on the agent’s secret habit of cutting herself with the Swiss Army knife she keeps with her at all times. (“The puncture of metal, the breaking of skin, comes with a rush of sensation that assures you that you are real after all.”) But it doesn’t begin to explain how she can cut herself until she bleeds and still handle such a demanding and dangerous job.An earlier version of the review of Karen Ellis’s “A Map of the Dark” contained a parenthetical aside that misrepresented the actions of one of the characters.Marilyn Stasio has covered crime fiction for the Book Review since 1988. Her column appears twice a month.Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter (@nytimesbooks), and sign up for our newsletter.Advertisement