https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/05/us/politics/friends-of-joe-biden-worry-a-run-for-president-could-bruise-his-legacy.html
Friends of Joe Biden Worry a Run for President Could Bruise His Legacy - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1045
AdvertisementSupported byBy Carl Hulse and Jason HorowitzWASHINGTON — Later this month, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. will escape for a family retreat to mourn his late son, Beau, but also to mull, as his dying son urged him to do, a campaign for president. Some of Mr. Biden’s friends and allies worry that he will decide it is a good idea.Those supporters, in the White House and the Senate, and within the political circles he has moved in for decades, fear that the legacy Mr. Biden has built as an effective partner who took on tough jobs for President Obama, not to mention the deep reservoir of public good will and sympathy he has amassed in his poignant handling of personal tragedies, could be sacrificed in the pursuit of an unsuccessful challenge to Hillary Rodham Clinton for the Democratic nomination.They fret that Mr. Biden, as well known for his undisciplined, sometimes self-immolating comments as he is for his charm on the trail, could endanger Mr. Obama’s own legacy by injuring Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy and causing his party to lose control of the White House.While the concern about Mr. Biden appears widespread among his political allies, few seem eager to tell him out of fear of hurting his feelings and seeming to be presumptuous about a decision that is all too personal.“People deeply care about him and admire him,” said one person who is personally close to Mr. Biden and has worked closely with him, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he did not want to jeopardize his relationship with the vice president. “But you obviously have to worry about the feasibility and ultimate impact of a run.”Asked if people were eager to communicate that concern to Mr. Biden, this associate said, “It’s very hard to do.”Donald J. Trump officially accepted the Republican party's nomination on July 22. Hillary Clinton was officially nominated on July 26 at the Democratic Convention.In a series of interviews, admirers of Mr. Biden inside and outside the administration said they understood Mr. Biden’s interest in running given his years at the highest levels of government but were mindful, and hoped he was mindful, that it could end disastrously. But they are concerned that the rawness of his son’s death has made processing the pluses and minuses of running difficult.Mr. Obama, according to those knowledgeable about his sentiments, feels highly protective of his No. 2 and is worried about the effects of a presidential race at a difficult personal time for Mr. Biden. In a sign of the conflicting pressures surrounding Mr. Biden, the vice president has told people that the terminal brain cancer of Beau Biden, who died in May, had caused him to consider resigning the vice presidency to take care of his grieving family, though those aware of the vice president’s thinking say that idea never became too serious.David Axelrod, a former Obama adviser who has spoken with Mr. Biden, said what many were thinking about the feasibility of his candidacy.“I understand completely why he would consider running,” said Mr. Axelrod, pointing to Mr. Biden’s 36 years in the Senate and two terms at Mr. Obama’s side. “On the other side is the reality of running for president. The fund-raising, the demands of campaigning and organizing, the constant and irritating exposure and the prospect of running against a well-fortified opponent who has a huge head start. Add all that up, and it is a counterweight to why he should run.”Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, said Mr. Biden appreciated “better than any candidate in the race” the rough-and-tumble nature of presidential campaigns. “He’s been through this before; he understands what is involved.”But Mr. Durbin contended that legacy should not be part of Mr. Biden’s consideration because “the reputation he enjoys in this country is solid, whatever his final decision.”Some of his donors agreed and have been encouraging, to a point.“He just has to look inside himself and decide, and people like me will support whatever decision he makes,” said Richard Davis, a donor to and supporter of Mr. Biden in New York. “But I only want him to proceed if he concludes he has a reasonably good chance of actually winning.”But others say that Mr. Biden, who struggled in White House races in 1988 and 2008, should not be reluctant to jump in, and they noted that he showed a command of the issues and performed strongly in debates that have become increasingly important presidential campaign moments.“Sometimes people forget how well he did,” said former Senator Kent Conrad, a North Dakota Democrat who served with Mr. Biden. “Joe has a humanity about him that comes across. He is for real. He believes in things. He is able to articulate his values, and I think he would acquit himself extremely well.”White House officials and others say Mr. Biden’s long record of public service gives him the right to make his own decision on his own timetable and to proceed as he chooses. Those close to Mr. Biden, who is 72, say they note a bit of condescension in suggestions that he should be satisfied with his achievements. Friends say the views of Washington “wise men” are unlikely to influence a decision they expect to be made by Mr. Biden and his immediate family.“There’s a family vacation in the near future, and that’s where the decision would be made for sure,” said John Marttila, a veteran Democratic campaign strategist who worked on Mr. Biden’s first Senate campaign in 1972 and was a close adviser to Mr. Biden on his subsequent presidential runs. “The one characteristic I would use to describe him is family man. And it is with his family that a decision will be made.”While the sudden attention on Mr. Biden’s plans has reminded Democrats of their fondness for the vice president, it has also called to mind his capacity to misspeak on the campaign trail. Admirers of Mr. Biden who asked not to be identified so that they could speak candidly without upsetting him said that the qualities that the public now sees as endearing — his talkativeness and avuncular approach — might not seem so appealing if he were to become a full-blown candidate. And news organizations are already going back over his long record, calling attention to potentially negative aspects.Some political veterans who talked with the vice president and did not want to be named said his best option might be to remain on the sidelines and see how the Clinton campaign and others play out.“If he lets it percolate,” one said, “it might come to him.”But such a strategy requires the implosion of Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, and while her candidacy worries some in the party, she remains popular and the overwhelming favorite for the Democratic nomination. To that end, the talk about Mr. Biden seemed to slightly annoy some of her supporters.“I’m strongly supporting Hillary and her run,” Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, said when asked about Mr. Biden. “And, you know, the vice president should do whatever is in his heart. It’s up to him.”Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement