https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/theater/jake-gyllenhaal-tom-sturridge-broadway.html
Jake Gyllenhaal and Tom Sturridge to Perform ‘Sea Wall/A Life’ on Broadway - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
473
AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael PaulsonJake Gyllenhaal and Tom Sturridge are bringing to Broadway a pair of moving monologues about fatherhood, loss and resilience.Fresh off a sold-out run Off Broadway at the Public Theater, the actors announced Thursday that they would remount the doubleheader this summer at the Hudson Theater. The plays, billed jointly as “Sea Wall/A Life” and directed by Carrie Cracknell, are scheduled to begin performances July 26, to open Aug. 8, and to close Sept. 29.“Sea Wall” is written by Simon Stephens (“The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time”) and performed by Mr. Sturridge, while “A Life” is written by Nick Payne (“Constellations”) and performed by Mr. Gyllenhaal. The plays, although written separately, grapple with similar dilemmas about men managing pain and joy as sons and fathers.The Broadway run will be produced by Nine Stories, which is Mr. Gyllenhaal’s production company, as well as Ambassador Theater Group, which operates the Hudson, Seaview Productions, Benjamin Lowy Productions and the Public Theater.In a joint telephone interview, the two actors said they were eager to continue working on the monologues, and encouraged by the audience response. “Like any great piece of writing, it evolves and changes as the audiences show you what it should be,” Mr. Gyllenhaal said.[Check out our Culture Calendar here.]“We’ve had these extraordinary moments with audiences after the show,” he added. “The stories they bring to us of their own experiences — the birth of their children, their own joy and pain and humanity — it feels like it’s having a resonance with people.”Both men said they are learning about themselves as they tell these stories. “Every night is a constant interrogation of the love I have for my family,” Mr. Sturridge said. “It’s exhilarating and confusing to constantly be exploring that.”Asked how the monologues, which have been presented on a largely bare set, might change for Broadway, Mr. Gyllenhaal responded with a joke. “I don’t want to give away too many hints,” he said, “but it involves confetti and smoke.”But then he turned serious. “There is an expectation, when you move, that there is a need on Broadway for spectacle, but what you feel is that the audience themselves are the spectacle in this piece,” he said. “Our intention has always been about the simplicity of it — that is the power of it.”The Broadway theater is more than three times the size of the one at the Public (there are 1,050 seats at the Hudson, and 299 at the Public’s Newman Theater). “The challenge is to work out the way for the space to still feel as intimate,” Mr. Sturridge said.Follow Michael Paulson on Twitter: @MichaelPaulson.Advertisement