https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/13/realestate/how-to-escape-the-dreaded-tenant-blacklist.html
How to Escape the Dreaded ‘Tenant Blacklist’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
515
AdvertisementSupported byAsk Real EstateOnce you’re on this publicly available list, it’s nearly impossible to get off. But that doesn’t mean you’ll never be able to rent again.By Ronda KaysenQ: In 2015, I rented a room in a Washington Heights apartment, paying rent to my roommate, who was the tenant on the lease. But he never paid the landlord and was taken to housing court during the time I lived there. I knew nothing about any of this. Long after I moved out, he was evicted and I was named in the judgment, without my knowledge. Now, real estate brokers tell me no landlord will rent to me because I am considered a risk, even though I have good credit. I asked the landlord to resubmit the judgment to the court without my name on it, but he refused. What do I do?A: Any tenant named in a Housing Court nonpayment or holdover case will probably end up on what is known as the tenant blacklist. Tenant screening bureaus compile these lists from court databases and then sell the information to landlords. Getting your name removed from these lists can be nearly impossible since the information is public record.There are hundreds of tenant screening bureaus, collecting names from courthouses around the country and selling the information to landlords. So if you were named in a case in New York and then tried to rent an apartment in Los Angeles, a landlord could find out. Often the details are limited, providing landlords with a snapshot that does not show a full, or even accurate, picture.You could make a motion in the court to get your name removed from the judgment and the case. On the chance that you succeed, you could then write to the screening bureaus demanding that they update their records to reflect the change. (They’re not allowed to knowingly sell inaccurate information.)But mostly, blacklisted tenants wait. Federal law limits how long these companies can sell the information to seven years, and New York generally limits it to five years.As frustrating and unfair as it seems, tenants do find apartments. “The blacklist will make it harder for you to find another apartment, but not impossible,” said Samuel Himmelstein, a Manhattan lawyer who represents tenants. Some landlords might be willing to consider your situation and make an exception. While large, institutional landlords often have strict rules, a mom-and-pop operation may be more flexible. Individuals subletting apartments in condos and co-ops wouldn’t subscribe to such services at all. For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.Advertisement