https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/arts/music/robyn-honey-interview.html
How Robyn, Pop’s Glittery Rebel, Danced Her Way Back From Darkness - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
108
After enduring an emotional crash, a breakup and the death of a mentor, the Swedish star has her first album in eight years and the most transcendent song of her career.The Swedish star Robyn is back, and she’s still leaning on what she calls the pillars of pop music: “Eternity and death. And losing control.”CreditCreditAna Cuba for The New York TimesSupported byBy Caryn GanzSTOCKHOLM — Robyn was dancing with everyone.The Swedish pop star was at a tiny, low-key club tucked into Café Opera, a ritzy nightspot here inside a grand opera house dating to 1895. Her blond head was a beacon, bobbing next to the booth where a D.J. was tending to a mesmerizing simmer. For hours on a Saturday night in August, she glided around, outfitted for a workout rather than a velvet rope: black Adidas leggings, white Eytys sneakers and a brown plaid shirt tied around her waist.Her brother, Jac, a D.J. and dancer, was hosting and spinning. Her sister, Effie, a video game journalist, brought a flock of friends. And her boyfriend, Max, a scruffy director, was cracking jokes. Robyn was in her element, swept up in the music and — dare I say it? — very happy.This may come as a shock to fans who think of the 39-year-old singer, songwriter and producer as the queen of heartbreak — her dance-floor weepers include “Be Mine!” (as in, “you never will”), “With Every Heartbeat” (as in, “it hurts”) and “Dancing on My Own” — as well as those wondering if she’s been O.K. over the past seven years.While her unconventional career began when she was just a teen in the mid-1990s with “Do You Know (What It Takes)” and “Show Me Love,” two songs that hit the Top 10 in the United States, Robyn started fresh in the States in 2008, when her self-titled album arrived internationally. After releasing a trio of dance-pop LPs in 2010 titled “Body Talk,” she was riding a wave that carried her from “Saturday Night Live” to the MTV Video Music Awards to arenas with Katy Perry and Coldplay. Then she all but vanished.There was a collaborative EP here, a gig there, but Robyn essentially did the unthinkable: She took her 30s off from being a star. Yet bizarrely, in a pop landscape that overwhelmingly rewards the new and the highly prolific, her influence didn’t shrink in her absentia — it swelled. Lena Dunham danced on her own in Season 1 of HBO’s “Girls,” then used an unfinished Robyn track during the show’s final season, in 2017. Lorde blogged about Robyn, covered one of her songs live and brought a framed picture of her along when she performed on “S.N.L.” Drag queens lip synced her songs. Demands for her return became a social-media phenomenon.On some level, none of us should have been surprised. The unspoken rules that govern pop stardom never seem to have applied to Robyn, perhaps because she hasn’t been chasing what most stars seek: success measured in record sales, radio play, awards, dollars and fame. She’s made sexy music without having a hyper-sexualized image; she’s worked with a tight-knit group of collaborators rather than leaping from one producer du jour to the next; she’s never solicited songs from other writers, performed on a singing-competition show or started an apparel line; and she only releases music that’s up to her standards — and entirely on her own timetable.And now, after more than a half-decade of psychoanalysis, a relationship meltdown, the death of one of her closest collaborators and four years spent working on her masterpiece — the glowing, transcendent song “Honey” — a new Robyn is ready to return.“IF SOMEONE WOULD had told me by the end of 2014, ‘You’re not going to release an album until the end of 2018,’ I would have totally freaked out,” Robyn said over breakfast in New York in May. It was the drizzly morning after a Q. and A. panel at the Red Bull Music Festival — her first big foray back into the spotlight — which she followed by showing up unannounced at a D.J. night in Brooklyn devoted to her music called This Party Is Killing You and flopping from the stage into her fans’ arms.During the Q. and A., which has been viewed online more than one million times, Robyn teased her big news: A new album, “Honey,” is coming on Oct 26. It is nine songs long, named after its most high-profile track (more on that later) and is a significant departure from the hooky, sparkling electro-pop of the “Body Talk” series.[Never miss a pop music story: Sign up for our weekly newsletter, Louder.]One thing that has never changed is the purity of Robyn’s voice. The producer Klas Ahlund, her closest collaborator since her self-titled album, said he was immediately struck by its honesty when they first met. “When she sings stuff, it sounds true,” he said. “She makes things sound profound and important.”Neneh Cherry, whom Robyn has cited as a key early influence, said her voice “really touches the inner sanctum of my heart.” (The two collaborated in 2014.) “Sometimes you think, oh, that’s a great dance routine, or that’s a great hook.” Ms. Cherry said. “But I believe her, and I think that to me is incredibly valuable.”Robyn’s writing process is designed to wring out truths: Mr. Ahlund described it as a series of “very intimate, open and sort of confessional conversations.” “We tell each other things that we probably wouldn’t tell somebody else,” he said. The more candid the final product is, the better: “Sometimes it’s even embarrassing to see that much of a person, and that’s when it gets really good.”When I visited Robyn and Mr. Ahlund’s Stockholm recording studio in March and asked where she’d been all these years, she said, “Rebooting,” as if she were an actual fembot. But as she explained in several interviews over six months, she was doing hard work healing old wounds from her childhood, and later, some fresher ones.Robyn wrote her first song at 11. It was about her parents’ split. And in many ways, she never stopped: “All my sad songs about heartbreak and stuff — I think it’s really still about the divorce,” she said.Her parents led an experimental theater troupe called Scheherazade, whose goal was “to test the conventionality of society in general,” she said. Robyn was on the road from when she was 6 months old until she was 7 for between three and six months a year. She learned about the magic of performance and enjoyed being treated like a small adult. But when the family gave up the nomadic life to prepare for Jac’s birth, she had culture shock.“It wasn’t easy for me to socialize with other kids when I got back from touring,” she said. “I felt different. Like we all do, but I didn’t feel like I got all the codes. I was a little awkward.”Three years later, her parents’ marriage fell apart. Robyn wrote the melody and lyrics to a song called “In My Heart,” and with the help of a teacher at a summer camp, made music for it. She performed the track at a school assembly in front of the dance-pop group Legacy of Sound and its singer, Meja, was so impressed with her poise and vocals, she offered to introduce Robyn to her team. Robyn sang the song a cappella for Peter Swartling, who became her manager, and at 15, her recording career began.Robyn arrived in the United States in 1997 with a co-writing credit on every song on her debut album, “Robyn Is Here.” She had already changed the spelling of her stage name (she was born Robin Carlsson) to avoid being confused with the other Robin with a hit called “Show Me Love.” The album, a pure slice of late-90s R&B, was created with the help of some titans of Swedish music, including Max Martin (who was working with Britney Spears and Backstreet Boys during that era) and his influential mentor, Denniz Pop.Its follow-up, “My Truth,” didn’t make it to the States, partly because Robyn included songs she wrote about having an abortion. “You can’t really talk about stuff like that in America, or you couldn’t at the time,” she said. “Not if you were an 18-year-old pop star.” Her 2002 LP, “Don’t Stop the Music,” was likewise only released outside the United States.Swimming with music-industry sharks as a young woman would have been perilous on its own. But Robyn was also navigating an American culture that had eluded her during her childhood in Sweden, where she grew up with two TV channels and three radio stations, discovering pop culture in fits and bursts.Unsurprisingly, she describes the first phase of her career as “totally unpleasant.” “My manager was asked by the label to make sure I showed my youthfulness more,” she said. “Whatever that meant.”But the issue that became nonnegotiable was creative control. Around the time Robyn’s frustrations with the industry were reaching a boiling point, the mysterious Swedish duo the Knife sent her a copy of its 2003 album, “Deep Cuts.” They teamed up to record “Who’s That Girl,” and when her label balked at the song, Robyn knew it was time to make her move.“I made this music that I really love, and it’s something different than I’ve done before. And you don’t like it?” she said. “Like, how are we going to work together? It’s impossible.”At 24, she started her own label, Konichiwa Records. (It is distributed in the United States by Interscope.) She now counts its debut release, the swaggering, clever “Robyn,” which she initially put out in 2005, as her first album. “A lot of people told me that they thought I was crazy, and that I would lose a lot of money,” she said. “If I would have followed their advice, none of this would have happened.”A FACT THAT GETS LOST in the conversation about Robyn as the queen of dance-crying is that she is really funny. Humor has had almost as much of a place in her songwriting as heartache. The name of her record company comes from a “Chappelle’s Show” sketch about a “racial draft” where culturally ambiguous celebrities get claimed by a single race. (The Asian delegation selects Wu-Tang Clan; GZA responds, “Konichiwa, bitches.”) “Curriculum Vitae,” the first track on “Robyn,” is nearly two minutes of goofy boasts: “World-record holder with a high score of two gazillion in Tetris/Two-time recipient of the Nobel Prize for super foxiest female ever.”She has a tendency to forget the names of extremely famous people, and describes them in blunt terms: “Jewish white guy,” she said, reaching for a comic she enjoys. (She needed to be a little more specific.) “In L.A. Grumpy old man. Annoyed with everybody.” (It was Larry David.) We repeated this exercise, which she dubbed “Jeopardy!,” when she couldn’t recall Meryl Streep, PJ Harvey and Ozzy Osbourne.Because she’s cautious about oversharing, Robyn has largely remained a mystery to fans outside Sweden. She’s as analytical as she is emotional and a chatty, thoughtful conversationalist. If she likes you, she mocks you. She’s great at bumming cigarettes from strangers. She’s not afraid to post unflattering photos of herself on Instagram. She walks around Stockholm unbothered, since the culture frowns on fawning over the famous. (The only person who approached us on the street there was a New Yorker named Jonathan. Robyn invited him to the club.)Robyn’s individuality draws in fans inspired by her lack of inhibition.“There’s a freedom in her music, and it’s that mixture of sadness and euphoria,” said Sam Smith. “There’s no other artist that can do it, in my opinion. And she’s such a huge part of the L.G.B.T.Q. community because we get to dance our pain away.”Detox, a “RuPaul’s Drag Race” alum who has performed to Robyn’s music, said she fell in love with the singer’s dance moves watching her “Cobrastyle” video. “It was so weird and quirky, but, like, the bitch had this crazy swagger,” she said. “It’s hard to call her a pop star because she’s kind of created her own niche and her own little bubble. She’s just Robyn.”When we had spoken in 2010 for a magazine profile while the “Body Talk” albums were in full swing, Robyn had mused on what she called the three big pillars of pop songwriting: love, the club and feeling like an outsider.Sipping a pilsner at the restaurant in Stockholm’s Moderna Museet on an August afternoon, she said she’d add a few others to the mix now: “Eternity and death. And losing control.”“In a way, I still agree that those are the three pillars of pop music. Those are pillars of youth,” she went on. “Everyone deals with sadness and lack of love when they’re kids, and all this abandonment. Most people do. Hopefully you want to learn something new and you want to move on to this other place, and I think for me, it was like, I really didn’t know how to calm myself down.”The “Body Talk” period was thrilling but draining. “She burned the whole box of candles at both ends,” Mr. Ahlund said. “I don’t think anyone can continue putting out that much music.”Around that time, she started perhaps the most demanding form of self-care: psychoanalysis. Her therapist, a woman in her 70s — “I wanted an older person,” she said, “someone that wasn’t impressed” — is now retired. They spoke three or four days a week, 45 minutes at a time, for six years.“I didn’t feel progress for the first four years,” Robyn said, then broke out in a loud laugh. “That’s funny when I think about it now. But it wasn’t until I totally crashed that I started making any progress.”The dark period started with Robyn’s split from Max (last name: Vitali), who had directed one of her most beloved videos, the one-take dance-like-nobody’s-watching “Call Your Girlfriend.” Then came the death of Christian Falk, a producer she had worked with since “Robyn Is Here,” from pancreatic cancer. Mr. Falk had been more than a mentor: He modeled a philosophy of making music that spoke to her soul. “He always did things on his own terms, he couldn’t do it any other way,” Robyn wrote when she released “Love Is Free,” an EP they worked on together as La Bagatelle Magique, in 2015. “It was all on feeling, all on desire.”From 2014 to 2015, she was in her bleakest place. In the beginning, she didn’t get out of bed. “Then, getting out of bed to get a coffee. Maybe going to therapy. Maybe seeing my brother. Maybe going for a walk,” she said.Eventually she started venturing to the office studio she keeps a few floors downstairs from her apartment. Songs started to take shape, but she was spending an enormous amount of time on them. “I was like, you may as well just move into my studio,” Mr. Ahlund said. “It’s better if you’re in there doing things forever, and if you want me, stick your head out.” So Robyn took a sliver of a room in the back of Mr. Ahlund’s all-white space, which has an oversized round wooden chair swinging from the ceiling, where Robyn said she records many of her vocals.“Speeding back up” after this period felt good, but “I can also sometimes miss being really sad, because I was so in tune with my feelings,” Robyn acknowledged. “There’s a closeness to your feelings — it’s special, and maybe a spiritual experience in some way.” The therapy yielded concrete results, too: Her parents, who hadn’t spoken in 20 years, resumed communication. And after two years of separation, she and Max reconciled.Robyn said she’s out of the darkness, but she doesn’t feel like she “returned.” “I feel like I almost became another person,” she said. “Like the goal wasn’t for me to come back — I really feel like I rearranged my insides in a way. I didn’t know what I even had to go back to. I felt like a lot of things that I believed before were not true anymore.”AFTER A WHILE, fans noticed that Robyn hadn’t released a full album in a long time. Robyn noticed them noticing, which didn’t help. But what started as a “total crisis of confidence” turned into something else: “Once I was past the really scary part,” she said, “it was just this incredible freedom.”When she started to ease back into music, she listened to Michael Jackson’s demos from “Off the Wall” and “Thriller” for inspiration, and you can hear a mingling of Michael and Janet Jackson and Prince peeking through on “Honey”: the space on the tracks, the funky bass lines, the twinkling synths, the soul.Work on “Honey” began in earnest in 2015 as Robyn was still grappling with a fair amount of personal pain, which she of course fed right back into the music. She approached Joseph Mount from the English electro-pop band Metronomy around that time, and what he thought was a one-off session just kept going. “I didn’t think it was going to become this significant chapter of my life,” he said with a laugh in a phone interview from England.When Robyn started talking to him about “Missing U,” a song about losing Mr. Vitali and Mr. Falk that would become the album’s opening track and first single, he was taken aback by her emotional transparency. “I work on my own, so I don’t often have these conversations with people,” he said, adding that he found the frank talk “school-boyishly embarrassing,” but “I kind of got used to it over time and understood it is completely integral to what she does.”Robyn came into the new album hoping to head in a fresh direction. “I was like, I’m not going to write one single sad love song,” she said. “And then when I started writing, it was sad love song, sad love song, sad love song. But it’s in a different way.”She still finds writing about loss compelling because of what it reveals. “It’s the most destabilizing thing ever,” she said. “You’re so just in the hands of your sorrow, and you find out things about yourself that you don’t find out any other way.”“Missing U” is a bridge from the sparkly, hyper-synthetic sounds of “Body Talk” into her next phase. But it’s also a decoy: The rest of the album darts off in different directions under Robyn’s guidance (she took a bigger role in making beats than ever before). There’s spare outré future pop (“Human Being”), sensual throb (“Baby Forgive Me”) and playful ’90s house (“Between the Lines”).Adam Bainbridge, who records as Kindness, contributed a slow-building reverie that samples Lil Louis’s orgasmic 1989 dance hit “French Kiss” called “Send to Robin Immediately” — which is what she ordered him to do after hearing it. And if “Honey” opens with a trauma, it ends with a salve: “Ever Again” is Robyn at her loosest, brushing aside pain and slinging a promise: “I’m never gonna be brokenhearted ever again.” It’s the kind of song that can be read earnestly or with a wink.After three complementary albums with a consistent sound, “Honey” is a shift — both a glance back at the history of pop and a slingshot into the future.At what point should pop careers end, I asked Robyn at the museum. “I think you either end it, or you keep evolving,” she said. “You might not want to evolve in the public eye. But I think that’s what it takes.” She said she was choosing to evolve.IN THE END, Robyn couldn’t have called the new album anything but “Honey.” You may have heard the name of that song as early as 2017, when it underscored a scene on “Girls.” The show’s creator and star, Ms. Dunham, had reached out to see if Robyn would contribute music to the final season; Robyn sent her options, and an early, busier, techno-ier version of “Honey” was the winner. Fans seized on the song immediately and started demanding that Robyn finish it: Variations on #ReleaseHoneyDammit became a running online plea and gag.Robyn saw the messages. But she was far from done with “Honey.” The track became a white whale for her: She just couldn’t put it down.Though she’s written many songs that stand at the crossroads of pop and club music, Robyn knew where she wanted “Honey” to be planted. “It’s not produced or written as a normal pop song,” she said. “It is totally based on this idea of club music.” Both genres come with their own mode of listening, she argued. “When you’re listening to club music, there’s no reward,” she said. “The reward isn’t, ‘Oh, here’s the chorus, here’s the lyric that makes sense.’ You have to enjoy what it is. You have to enjoy that there’s no conclusion.”“Club music taught me so much about myself,” she added. “Having patience, or appreciating a different type of way of taking in life. That to me is like, what ‘Off the Wall’ is. Or ‘I Feel Love’ or ‘Rock Your Baby’ with George McCrae.” (She later added Kate Bush’s “Running Up That Hill” to the list.) “It’s a hypnotic thing. Time stops, and I don’t even think about where I am when I hear music like that. That’s the high that I want,” she said, and laughed heartily. “That’s what I need.”Robyn worked on “Honey” longer than any other song she’s ever written and “really drove Joseph and Klas crazy,” she said.Mr. Mount compared it to the endless making of the Beatles’ “Maxwell’s Silver Hammer.” But “It felt like the linchpin of the whole thing,” he added.She had played me the song in March, and she blasted it at the Robyn dance party following her Q. and A. in New York in May. But this was August: “Honey” had evolved.Robyn hurried into her home studio (pink floor, mirrored wall, snapshot of herself and Danny DeVito at Coachella over the desk), then dashed off into another room and returned, ripping the packaging off a brand-new pair of headphones. She bent over a pair of digital turntables, her eyes closed, adjusting knobs and dancing in place. She played a Michael Jackson remix, and “Purple Music,” an unreleased Prince song from 1982. “What’s a better way to spend a Saturday?” she asked.When it was time for “Honey,” she turned the volume up even higher and fiddled at the mixer for a bit, then sat down on a gold chair.The song’s woozy cocoon enveloped us, its heartbeat thumping in our hair, our nails, our feet. Sounds strutted across the room, some joining the blend, some ghosting as quickly as they arrived. “No, you’re not gonna get what you need,” her voice sang from the speakers. “But baby, I have what you want. Come get your honey.” It was overwhelming, gauzy and beautiful.It was its own reward.An earlier version of this article misspelled the name of a track on “Honey.” It is “Send to Robin Immediately,” not “Send to Robyn Immediately.”Advertisement