https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/28/books/review/matias-faldbakken-waiter.html
In This Norwegian Novel, an Old-School Waiter Tries to Keep Up the Old Ways - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
660
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Pete WellsTHE WAITER By Matias Faldbakken 247 pp. Scout Press. $24.99.Every scrap of the action in Matias Faldbakken’s “The Waiter,” not that there’s a whole lot of it, happens at a restaurant called the Hills. It’s located in Oslo, but its tradition-bound type is disappearing everywhere. A piano player works on a mezzanine, showering the dining room with arpeggios from Bach and other “great composers.” The customers below appreciate the chef but don’t treat him as a deity. Nobody thinks twice about asking for substitutions, for dishes that aren’t on the menu or for extra nuts and seeds on the goat cheese salad with passion fruit vinaigrette. The Art Nouveau-style oak frames on the mirrors were installed in 1901. Most of the restaurant’s human fixtures appear to have been around nearly as long, including the waiter who narrates the novel. Stability is the product that the Hills sells.It’s also the only thing keeping the waiter in one piece — that and the row of 25-millimeter horn buttons on the front of his white-canvas jacket, made by an old-guard firm that also manufactures military shirts. The waiter is a bundle of nerves with a corkscrew in one pocket — a neurotic, you’d say, although he calls himself a “sensitive.” He doesn’t handle coffee well, even when somebody else is drinking it. “Other things we highly sensitives react to are noise and complex social contexts,” he says. “The mixing of roles. And hunger, or being given too many jobs to do at once.”Each of these is an occupational hazard of waitering. And while the pianist at the Hills doesn’t seem to know any Metallica, all the other triggers are present in spades. There’s a regular called the Pig, a suave operator in the world of finance, who one afternoon not only shows up 20 minutes late but then breaks years of protocol by trying to engage the waiter’s help in some business that seems to have nothing to do with lunch. There’s Edgar, the waiter’s best friend, who leaves his young daughter in the waiter’s care at the restaurant all afternoon while he goes off on some unspecified errand.Most of all, there’s a new customer, a friend of the Pig’s, a woman. Everything about her unnerves the waiter: her quadruple-espresso order, her refusal to read a newspaper while she waits, her indeterminate age and place in the social order and her appearance. “Like debauchery dressed as asceticism,” the waiter thinks. “A generator for jealousy.”A hard-working sensitive can take only so much and the waiter starts to malfunction. He delivers food to the wrong table. He makes inane replies to reasonable requests. He catches his hand in a wine drawer and bandages it badly. He keeps the Widow Knipschild waiting an uncomfortably long time for her second glass of port. He grows more and more glitchy, threatening the principle that he has organized his life around, disappearing into his professional role. As he puts it, “I make objects and food come and go without being noticed myself.”These do not sound like the ingredients of a page turner, but Faldbakken has a way with nonaction. He builds a delicious tension between the paucity of events and the lavishness of the technique with which they are described. His waiter, though taciturn while on duty, is a chatterbox as a narrator, providing a busy, intricate analysis until each minor stumble achieves seismic status. Played in slow motion, his malfunctions unspool as slapstick with an undertow of dread.As the story moves along, the waiter loses his sense of who he is and what he’s supposed to be doing so completely that he starts to seem like a man who could do anything. He’s like Travis Bickle played by Buster Keaton.The waiter himself, with his mix of self-dramatization and self-disparagement, thinks he resembles another movie character, the maniacal oilman in “There Will Be Blood,” Daniel Plainview. “But Plainview is more durable than I am,” he says. “He looks more outdoorsy. I’ve got more of a cafe vibe. Where he’s determined and vengeful, I’m more service-oriented and jumpy.”I can’t vouch for how closely Alice Menzies’ translation follows Faldbakken’s Norwegian original, but that “cafe vibe” gives a sense of her light colloquial touch with the narrator’s loping, halting, self-revising tone. Faldbakken has written three other novels, known collectively as the Scandinavian Misanthropy Trilogy, which have not been published in English. Outside Norway, he is better known as an artist whose exhibitions often feature everyday objects, like newspapers and cardboard boxes, altered in ways that make them useless.The waiter seems to be heading for the same fate. He has no personal life to speak of, or at least none that he speaks of; his entire sense of himself is built on how well he does his job. Between episodes of professional breakdown, he’s given to rueful inner monologues on the theme of futility. He can, at times, sound like one of Thomas Bernhard’s pessimists, but Faldbakken deploys a mild, noncaustic humor that was not prominent in Bernhard’s chemistry kit.The waiter is an anachronism and he knows it. The modern world that is at the doorstep of the Hills has devalued his style of careful service work, even as it needs more of it, and makes more intense demands on the people who do that work. Those who make the lives of the comfortable even more comfortable are society’s shock absorbers. They may start to screech, but the car keeps rolling along.Pete Wells is the restaurant critic for The Times.Advertisement