https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/15/us/college-admissions-scandal-students.html
‘So Disheartening’: At Colleges Embroiled in Scandal, a Sense of Outrage and Sadness - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1345
AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan Levin, Concepción de León and Adeel HassanRarely is there a single conversation that dominates the college campuses of America, a back-and-forth that extends from Palo Alto, Calif., to Winston-Salem, N.C., and from New Haven, Conn., to Los Angeles.There was one this week.In classrooms and dining halls, on quads and in bars, there was a similar sense of astonishment. How could they? Can you believe it? United by an admissions scandal that touched so many of their campuses, students seethed in unison. They railed against privilege and greed. They worried that their diplomas might have been tarnished even before they were handed to them on stage.Two Stanford University students channeled their fury into a class-action lawsuit that claims they wasted their money when they applied to schools that were ultimately linked to what the Justice Department called its largest ever college admissions prosecution.At Yale, a 20-year-old junior said she felt vindicated because her stellar grades had earned her acceptance — not cheating or kickbacks.At Georgetown, arguments erupted between students in classes and others offered their loan applications to each other as satirical proof that their parents had not wielded their wallets to gain them a spot.“When the rich, famous and influential game a system already susceptible to corruption, it perpetuates who remains in power,” said Jessica Wolfrom, a graduate student at Georgetown. “And, really, what does it mean when the system itself is so competitive that the people with the most privilege and wealth feel they have to cheat and lie and pay people off to get their kids ahead? Where does that leave everyone else?”[Read about the completely legal and largely unregulated world of private college consulting.]At the University of California, Los Angeles — among the campuses ensnared in the shocking scheme — students like Ayesha Haleem said she and her classmates were both heartbroken and fuming.“The higher education system has always benefited people who come from privileged backgrounds,” said Ms. Haleem, a Pakistani 23-year-old senior. “Students of color have it so much harder to even get to these places.”The issue of race-based admissions dominated conversations at the University of Texas at Austin, which was party to a landmark affirmative action case several years ago and has a student body that is now 41 percent white, down from 62.7 percent in 2000.The university’s men’s tennis coach, Michael Center, was fired Wednesday after he was accused of taking a $100,000 bribe in exchange for recruiting a well-off student who was not a competitive tennis player.“This is a big story not just because of possible corruption, but also because there is an obvious rift this has exposed on campus,” said Forrest Milburn, a 23-year-old senior who is the managing editor of The Daily Texan, the campus newspaper. “People are thinking it’s affirmative action when really it’s just wealth and privilege that gets you in the door.”[Read more on how the admissions scandal has been a harsh reminder of racial disparities.]The scandal’s legal fallout is most likely only beginning, and it has already spread beyond the criminal indictments that federal prosecutors made public this week.On Wednesday, just one day after prosecutors announced the charges in the so-called Operation Varsity Blues, two Stanford University students brought a class-action complaint in a federal court in California, and accused college after college of negligence. Although the suit was amended on Thursday — dropping one of the students but adding other plaintiffs without ties to Stanford — the case was an example of the exasperation on campuses.The plaintiffs in the case alleged that they had wasted money when they applied to schools that were ultimately ensnared in the scheme and that every “qualified, rejected” student had also been hurt by the coast-to-coast fraud.transcriptHosted by Michael Barbaro, produced by Clare Toeniskoetter, Andy Mills and Ike Sriskandarajah, and edited by Paige Cowett and Larissa AndersonA major college admissions scandal has laid bare the price of entry for some wealthy families — and the cost for everyone else.michael barbaroFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today: When a federal prosecutor revealed a $25 million scheme to purchase college admissions for the children of celebrities and executives, he declared, “There can be no separate college admissions system for the wealthy.” But there is. It’s Thursday, March 14.archived recordingWe’re here today to announce charges in the largest college admissions scam ever prosecuted by the Department of Justice. We’ve charged 50 people nationwide with participating in a conspiracy that involved —michael barbaroJenny and Katie, where does this story begin?katie bennerSo according to prosecutors, the first lead in this case came about a year ago.michael barbaroKatie Benner covers the Department of Justice. Jennifer Medina is a national correspondent for The Times.jennifer medinaSo this story begins with a totally different investigation.katie bennerFederal prosecutors are investigating an entirely separate case when one of the targets in that investigation gave them a huge tip. There could be a bribery and cheating scandal occurring in the college admissions process.jennifer medinaThe feds think that this is pretty interesting, and it turns out —katie bennerThey discovered a man named Rudolph Meredith, a soccer coach at Yale. And they thought that he might be taking money in order to falsely recruit students to the team so they could get into the university. Once the F.B.I. understands how big a deal this is going to be, and as they investigate and more and more schools become involved —jennifer medinaThey bring in more and more investigators. They give this a name: Operation Varsity Blues.michael barbaroAs in the James Van Der Beek movie?jennifer medinaAs in the James Van Der Beek movie.michael barbaroWhich we all saw.jennifer medinaI didn’t see.archived recording 1Dozens of actors, coaches and C.E.O.s are among those charged. ARCHIVED RECORDING 2: The former C.E.O. of Pimco, the investment firm. ARCHIVED RECORDING 3: Actresses Felicity Huffman and Lori Loughlin.archived recording 4You also have William McGlashan. He’s a senior exec at TPG.archived recording 5Huffman starred on ABC’s “Desperate Housewives,” and Loughlin is best known for her role on “Full House.”jennifer medinaAnd it all leads back to this guy in Newport Beach, California, who charges somewhere in the ballpark of $15,000 to more than a $1 million to guarantee your kid a spot in a school.michael barbaroAnd who is this guy in Newport Beach, California?katie bennerSo this guy is Rick Singer.archived recording (rick singer)Hi, my name is Rick Singer, and I’m the founder of The Key.katie bennerSinger is a guy in his 50s who lives in Newport Beach, California.archived recording (rick singer)As a father myself, I understand the stress the college admissions process can put on your family.katie bennerHe is sort of a player in this world of academic coaches who help students, oftentimes who can pay a lot of money, get into colleges, including some of the nation’s top schools — Yale, Stanford, Harvard.archived recording (rick singer)For the past 25 years, our coaches have been helping students discover their life passion and guiding them and their families through the complex college admissions maze.jennifer medinaHe was doing legitimate college counseling work, catering to the wealthy, trying to get their kids to school, but legitimate stuff.archived recording (rick singer)My Key method unlocks the full potential of your son or daughter and sets them on a course to excel in life.jennifer medinaSo he does that for several years, then seems to somehow take a break and works in a call center, but then somehow gets back into this and starts making connections for people to get their kids into schools that they want to get to.archived recording (rick singer)Getting into the right college will set the trajectory for the rest of your son or daughter’s life. Don’t leave it to chance. Let a Key coach come alongside you and your family to truly unlock your student’s potential.katie bennerEventually, the F.B.I. lands on Singer’s door.jennifer medinaHe looks in all this huge amount of evidence that they’ve got against him. He thinks about what he’s going to do, and he agrees to flip.katie bennerAnd Singer begins to help the F.B.I.jennifer medinaHe agrees to wear a wire. He agrees to go back to the clients that he’s worked with for years and tape, in excruciating detail, what he’s done. He agrees to call all these people he’s worked with — people he’s accepted bribes from and people he’s given bribes to. Some of these are parents. Some of these are coaches. Some of these are associates — people he’s paying off in one way or another.katie bennerThey’re discussing extremely strange, bizarre, extraordinary measures that very, very few people could imagine ever taking in order to get their kid into school.jennifer medinaThere’s sort of two different ways that he operates. The first is this athletic scheme where he amasses a number of coaches at a number of different schools — more than a dozen schools — who agree to accept his bribes and say, I want this person on my team. All these coaches get special slots for athletes. They get admitted to universities on a totally different track than anybody who’s not an athlete.michael barbaroSo these coaches are communicating with the admissions departments at these colleges. They’re almost getting, like, their own personal bucket of student athletes.jennifer medinaAbsolutely, that’s exactly the way it works. You get to say, this is who I want on my team, and the admissions office essentially agrees to go along with what you say. So he’s paying off these coaches in all these different colleges.michael barbaroAnd how do the coaches pretend that someone is a legitimate athlete when they’re not? And how do the parents play along with that as well?jennifer medinaSo he had a very elaborate scheme in lots of cases. One of his typical ways of operating apparently was to fake photos. In one case, he said, I need a picture of an Asian girl playing soccer. And we’re going to Photoshop the applicant’s face onto this photo.michael barbaroWow.jennifer medinaAlmost every case that we know about, this person never played on the team. They would drop out as soon as they arrived on campus. In some cases, the kids didn’t even know that they were expected to play on this team. They created a profile saying that this kid ran track, and he gets to campus and is speaking to a college counselor, and the counselor says, oh, so I see you run track. And the kid says, what are you talking about? He didn’t even know.michael barbaroO.K., so that’s one scam, this kind of sports coaching method scam. What was the other scam that the F.B.I. discovered?katie bennerHe talked about how he arranged for students to take their SAT or ACT exams at special sites where he had bribed the proctors on those tests to basically correct the student’s answers. He talked about how he encouraged the parents to get their children tested for disabilities so that they could have more time to complete the exam. He talked about how he would sometimes even have a man — an adult — pose as the students at the test centers that he, quote, unquote, “controlled,” and that adult would take the test for the kids. And this guy was so good at it, he could basically get any score that they wanted.michael barbaroJenny and Katie, you’ve described an elaborate system of wealthy parents bribing their children’s way into college. Aren’t there less risky ways for rich people to get their children into college?jennifer medinaThe world of college admissions for the extremely wealthy is really complicated. So there are three ways to get in. First, you’ve got the front door. There’s tests. There’s grades. There’s your extracurricular activities, your achievement. There’s also the issue of legacies. If your parent went to this college you’re trying to get to, you’ll probably get some extra points. If you play a sport, you might get some extra points so you can be on their team. That’s the front door. And then there’s the back door.katie bennerThere are so many legal ways that the ultra-wealthy have been gaming the system for a long time to get their kids into school. They donate tremendous amounts of money. They help people build buildings and work on development projects.jennifer medinaAnd this is also the world where you have incredibly high-end tutoring. This is not just spending a couple hours learning how to navigate an SAT. This is hundreds of thousands of dollars, many times over years, to come up with all sorts of elaborate ways to brand yourself, essentially, into something that you think will get you into the right college, whatever you consider the right college to be. So then there’s this third door, what Singer referred to as a side door, which is essentially just bribing.katie bennerCheating.jennifer medinaCutting out the middleman or cutting out the pretense of anything other than paying people off and bribery. And I think the reason why this case is so fascinating, and we’re sitting here talking about it and everybody is so interested in it, is the difference between these two doors — the side door and the back door. Now, if you’re the F.B.I., that line is very clear. It’s clear that it is completely illegal to simply bribe somebody to get your kid into the college of your choice. But if you’re one of these parents, where you’re operating in a world where you know many people are paying tens of thousands of dollars or hundreds of thousands of dollars to universities in an often successful attempt to get your kid into the college, then maybe this doesn’t seem so strange.katie bennerCertainly we know it’s breaking the law. And certainly you can tell from the recordings that were transcribed by the prosecutors that the parents knew they were breaking the law. But they also don’t act like breaking the law is a completely big deal. And they seem to operate in a parallel universe, with different consequences for them.jennifer medinaThey knew that this crossed a line. They did it anyway. The why of why they did it anyway is actually really interesting and really complicated. It’s not as though if these kids went to college their income potential was going to grow enormously.michael barbaroBecause they’re already rich.jennifer medinaThey’re already wealthy, and studies have shown that people who go to colleges and are already coming in with wealth do not necessarily see a huge jump in their income over a lifetime. On the other hand, that’s not true for kids who come from poorer families. There is a lot that shows — especially if you go to a highly selective college and if you’re successful, there’s lots of things that show your income potential goes way up. It is a path to the middle class. That’s what we’ve always thought of college as being — a path to the middle class. But it’s not clear that if you’re already part of the most-upper class, that you need to go to some specific college to stay in that upper class.michael barbaroSo why then? Why do these parents who can afford to participate in this kind of scam — why do it? If there’s no tangible benefit, why take that risk?jennifer medinaI don’t think it’s about economics. That might be part of it, or they might tell themselves that it’s part of it. But it is obviously at least somewhat about status, about maybe being able to put that sticker on the back of your car that says, my student goes to Yale University. Maybe it’s that you want to give your kid some perfect social experience that you think they’re going to have at this right school. Or maybe you just want to save your kid embarrassment. Clearly these parents didn’t have a lot of faith in their kids. And what’s also really fascinating here is that it’s not just Ivy League schools. Yale is, of course, the one that is sort of eye-popping. And there’s Stanford, and there’s all sorts of elite schools. There’s also U.C.L.A. But there’s also schools like Wake Forest University and University of Texas at Austin — all schools that they might have been just fine getting into on their own, and are not schools that we think of as holding a lot of cachet in these elite circles. So what was that about? Why were they so willing to spend so much money and so much effort and break the law to get into schools? We really don’t know the answer to that yet.katie bennerAnother way to look at it from the point of view of the parents is that no matter what their motivations are, whether they be social or whether they want an education for their children that they believe is the best education that money can buy, they have this feeling that the kids face really long odds. College has never been more competitive. I think that Harvard accepted about 5 percent of all of the students who applied last year. And they understand that colleges are also looking for a wide array of students as well. They don’t want a class just packed with all of the people who can pay full tuition, donate a million dollars to a development fund and continue to give for the rest of their lives because they’re extremely well-heeled. They’re looking for something more. And they might worry that their students are not extraordinary enough to get in. And so they’re going to use the money that they have to try to offset not a systemic inequity, like socioeconomic inequities or racial inequities, but to offset their children’s own inability to get in.jennifer medinaA lot of it seems to be about the certainty of it, about the security. It’s not a question of maybe you will or won’t get into this school. It’s, I’m going to make sure that you have a spot at this specific school that you want to be at, that I know I can get you into. And I am going to be able to breathe a sigh of relief or celebrate or congratulate you much earlier, with much more confidence, than I would if I had gone through the front door, or even if I had gone through the back door.michael barbaroAnd where do these privileged kids who were actually implicated in this scheme — where do they fit into all of this?archived recordingI don’t know how much of school I’m going to attend, but I’m going to go in and talk to my deans and everyone and hope that I can try and balance it all. But I do want the experience of, like, game days, partying — I don’t really care about school.jennifer medinaSo the kids whose parents participated in this scheme are fascinating. It is clear that some of them knew what was going on, but many of them didn’t. Many of them are probably waking up this week stunned to learn the great lengths that their parents not only went through to cheat on their behalf, but the great lengths they went to to hide it from them.katie bennerThe parents worked so hard to keep their children from knowing what was going on. And this creates a whole other layer of privilege that we see in education, that we see in business, that we see that these adult parents certainly had in spades — this idea that if you do not know all of the winds at your back pushing you forward, helping you along, you will believe that you deserve everything that you got.jennifer medinaThey’ve been operating under the assumption that they earned their spot. They deserve it. And I think this is forcing us to have a conversation, to think about, what does deserving it really mean? What this has done is really laid bare, for all of us to see in plain view, how unequal the system truly is — that if you have enough money, you can buy your way in. But at the same time, there are thousands of students who are taking out massive loans to come in and are desperate to get into higher education, which our country has long believed is the way to get into the middle and upper class. It’s supposed to be this system based on your academic merit that’s going to give you a path to get from wherever you started from to where you want to be. But what we’ve seen is that’s not true. If you believe that education, and that a college education specifically, is the great equalizer or can be the great equalizer of our country, what this shows you is that that system is completely broken.katie bennerIt’s difficult to think of a scenario that speaks more clearly to the idea of inequity.jennifer medinaWhat this really shows is that there’s all sorts of ways people have been using money and power and influence in this system for years that is completely legal and completely accepted. And it’s perpetuated every single admissions cycle.michael barbaroJenny Medina, Katie Benner, thank you both very much.jennifer medinaThank you.katie bennerThank you.michael barbaroSince the F.B.I. revealed the bribery scheme on Tuesday, at least three college coaches from Stanford, the University of Texas and the University of Southern California have been either fired or placed on leave. Two of the most prominent parents in the case, the chairman of a major law firm and a partner at a private equity company, have also been placed on leave. The fate of the students involved in the scheme remains unclear. On Wednesday, the University of Southern California said it would investigate any current students connected to the bribery and reject any future applicants who benefited from it.Many of the universities, though, have moved swiftly to fire coaches implicated in the scheme. Parents have made first appearances in court. And companies have distanced themselves from executives accused of paying William Singer, a college admissions consultant, to use bribes and deceit to raise their children’s test scores or get them admitted to their chosen schools through athletic recruiting spots, despite the fact that they were not competitive athletes.In a brief court appearance on Friday, a Vancouver businessman who is accused of paying Mr. Singer at least $200,000 between 2011 and 2013 to have a hired test administrator take the SAT in place of each of his two sons, and a Canadian high school graduation exam for his older son, pleaded not guilty to conspiracy to commit mail and wire fraud.The businessman, David Sidoo, was released on $1.5 million bail, under conditions including that he was not to travel beyond the United States or Canada. He was the first parent to enter a plea.[Learn more about how families who have legally hired college admissions consultants view the ethics of their choices.]U.C.L.A. warned this week that it might punish students who were connected to the scheme, including those already admitted or enrolled, “up to and including cancellation of admission,” the university said in a statement.Wake Forest said that a student who had been admitted after $100,000 in payments were routed through the volleyball coach was still enrolled on the campus in Winston-Salem, N.C., adding that it had no reason to believe that the student had been aware of the scheme.And Stanford said the two prospective students caught up in the case were never admitted; one did not even apply. Still, students at the Palo Alto, Calif., campus said they were deeply disappointed that their university was enmeshed in the scandal.“I worked so hard to get admitted into the school,” said Hailee Hoffman, a 22-year-old senior who is on the gymnastics team. In addition to taking advanced placement classes, she said she also trained more than 30 hours a week while in high school. “To find that someone had exploited the system and tried to buy their way in was so disheartening.”[Read more about how the authorities say the scheme worked, from bribes to doctored photos.]About a year ago, federal prosecutors working on a securities fraud case were tipped off to the elaborate scheme by a suspect who hoped to be granted leniency for his cooperation. The suspect, identified by The Wall Street Journal as Morrie Tobin, who attended Yale University and is now a Los Angeles financial executive, reportedly told investigators that the college’s soccer coach had sought a bribe in exchange for getting his daughter into the school.This week, the campus was mostly quiet because of Spring Break. But students were still abuzz about the scandal. Britton O’Daly, the editor-in-chief of the Yale Daily News, which has published three stories about the university’s connection, said he was spending the week in silence at a French monastery. But he could not stop himself from “sneaking away from monks to check my phone because of all this.”Students whose parents were charged in the case could not be reached for comment this week. But Jack Buckingham, whose mother, Jane Buckingham, is accused of paying $50,000 for an ACT proctor to take the test in his place, told The Hollywood Reporter that he was unknowingly involved in a plot that gave those “who may not work as hard as others an advantage over those who truly deserve those spots.”“For that I am sorry,” he told the publication, adding that this might “finally cut down on money and wealth being such a heavy factor in college admissions.”Olivia Jade Giannulli, a 19-year-old social media influencer whose celebrity parents were accused of paying $500,000 in bribes for her and her sister to be falsely recruited to U.S.C.’s rowing team, has remained silent. But she was dropped from a sponsorship with a makeup company and her Instagram account has been the target of vitriol.This week, as the scandal unfolded and her parents were arrested, Ms. Giannulli was celebrating Spring Break on a yacht owned by a U.S.C. Board of Trustees member. On Thursday, TMZ reported that she and her sister, also a U.S.C. student, decided to drop out over fears of being bullied and would not return to campus next week.Still, there was also a measure of sympathy for those unwittingly caught in their parents’ alleged deception.“I know that I would feel pretty ashamed if my parents were embroiled in a scandal of this magnitude,” Ms. Wolfrom said. “If I were in their position, I am not sure I’d show up to class again anytime soon.”Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misidentified the college from which Morrie Tobin graduated. He attended Yale, but later graduated from the University of Vermont.An earlier version of this article misstated the number of articles that the Yale Daily News published this week about the university’s connection to the scandal. It was three, not one.Reporting was contributed by Sarah Mervosh, Aodhan Beirne, Kalyn Wolfe, Alan Blinder, Kate Taylor and Christopher Cameron.Advertisement