https://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/31/arts/television/game-of-thrones-stars-and-producers-hit-the-west-coast.html
‘Game of Thrones’ Stars and Producers Hit the West Coast - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1734
AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave ItzkoffLOS ANGELES — In the time that Peter Dinklage has portrayed the cunning nobleman Tyrion Lannister on the HBO fantasy series “Game of Thrones,” he has calculated his way out of life-or-death situations, led victorious armies on battlefields and won an Emmy Award and a Golden Globe for his work. But he had never been to a gala premiere for “Game of Thrones,” because HBO had never held one.This was rectified on a recent Monday evening when Mr. Dinklage and some two dozen of his television co-stars arrived at the TCL Chinese Theater, a Hollywood landmark synonymous with ostentatious media gatherings, to celebrate the third season of “Game of Thrones,” which begins on Sunday. Striding past cheering fans and popping flashbulbs, Mr. Dinklage said, with a wryness that Tyrion would appreciate, that he respected HBO for putting its money “into our show rather than onto the red carpet” in past years. “We snuck in the back door,” he added. “We made our presence known. We fought some dragons and now we can have a party for it.”This was the kickoff to more than a week’s worth of events at which “Game of Thrones,” an epic drama about the struggle for power in an unforgiving world, would be promoted on a scale it had not previously enjoyed. For the stars of “Game of Thrones,” who had been flown in from the farthest reaches of Britain, the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark and New Jersey, these occasions were more than opportunities to wash the simulated muck from their faces and dress in contemporary clothing. These were also long-awaited moments of recognition, letting them see firsthand how “Game of Thrones” has been embraced in the nation where enthusiasm for the show burns brightest.But this itinerary, which for some participants would continue from Los Angeles to smaller pockets of fandom in San Francisco, Seattle and beyond, also offered frequent reminders of how hard “Game of Thrones” has had to work to earn the embrace of its network parent, and how far it still has to go from cult phenomenon toward mainstream acceptance. Recalling his own initial reaction to “Game of Thrones,” Michael Lombardo, HBO’s president of programming, said, “That’s not a show I’m going to watch.”He added, “How many people have you run into who say, ‘I don’t do shows with dragons’?”In the Realm of the GodsEarlier that morning, George R. R. Martin, the author of the best-selling “Song of Ice and Fire” novels from which “Game of Thrones” is adapted, was particularly conspicuous as he paced the lobby of the Four Seasons hotel.Dressed in his customary fisherman’s cap and black suspenders, Mr. Martin, a round man with a bushy beard, chatted with guests and handed them souvenir coins made to look as if they came from the mythical continent of Westeros. But after his admirers left, Mr. Martin told a reporter he was ambivalent about the increased visibility he has gained from the television series and how he found it “disconcerting to be recognized.”Having heard that the “Avengers” star Robert Downey Jr. supposedly walks unnoticed through fan conventions by wearing cheap masks and shabby costumes, Mr. Martin said with a sardonic chuckle, “I may have to try that next year.”This was a problem that David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, the creators of “Game of Thrones,” would surely love to struggle with. As they recalled over tea that afternoon, it was one year earlier, at the start of the show’s second season, that HBO had persuaded them it was not ready for the sort of gala premiere the network customarily organizes for shows like “Boardwalk Empire,” “Girls” and “The Newsroom.” Explaining HBO’s rationale, Mr. Weiss said he and Mr. Benioff were told, “ ‘By next year, it’ll hit a point where it is more than worth it to put something big together.’ We didn’t know what they meant by that.”In some respects, bigness has never been a problem for “Game of Thrones.” The series employs more than 30 actors to play the warring members of its Stark, Lannister, Targaryen and Baratheon families, and it is produced simultaneously in America, Northern Ireland, Iceland, Croatia and Morocco. (Without discussing budget details, HBO says “Game of Thrones” is one of its most expensive series, though it handily pays for itself through sales of DVDs, downloads and broadcast rights in the nearly 200 foreign countries where it is shown.) Showings of new episodes draw about 3 million to 4 million viewers in the United States, though HBO says its audience averages more than 11 million when broadcasts across multiple time slots are factored in. Those numbers, which have grown over the run of the series, cannot touch a basic-cable genre smash like AMC’s zombie-apocalypse drama “The Walking Dead,” but they are on pace with HBO’s horror romance “True Blood” and ahead of another HBO mainstay, “Boardwalk Empire.”For all of its popularity, “Game of Thrones” can sometimes feel like the black sheep of the HBO family. It lacks the name-brand pedigree of “Boardwalk Empire” (whose producers include Terence Winter of “The Sopranos” and Martin Scorsese) or the cutting-edge cultural cachet of “Girls.” Even its most recognizable actors have experienced a disconnect between the ample resources needed to produce “Game of Thrones” and the reception it receives in the world beyond Westeros. Emilia Clarke, who plays the show’s platinum-haired dragon-taming royal Daenerys Targaryen, had been brought here from New York, where she is starring on Broadway in “Breakfast at Tiffany’s.” But when she appears in public as herself — a natural brunette with no fire-breathing serpents on her shoulders — Ms. Clarke said her celebrity vanished.9 PhotosView Slide Show ›“It’s just the wig,” she said with a laugh. “I’m telling you, man. No one wants me without the wig.” Mr. Lombardo of HBO said that while his network did not look solely at ratings to gauge the success of a series, “I would be being dishonest if I said you don’t always hope that a show finds more viewers.” (“Game of Thrones” has not officially been renewed for a fourth season, but Mr. Benioff and Mr. Weiss are already working on scripts and outlines for it.)Still, Mr. Lombardo wondered how much more room there was for the series to grow, particularly one teeming with foreign-sounding names, magic and mystical creatures.He said a current advertising campaign for “Game of Thrones,” based on the hovering shadow of a winged dragon, “probably didn’t help this year, because we fully embraced who we were” and “didn’t disguise the fact that there’s a big fantasy element on the show.” Flashy premiere events, Mr. Lombardo said, were essentially “a thank-you for the cast and crew; it’s a moment for them to shine.” But, he added: “I don’t think this translates into more viewers. If it did, we’d have a lot more parties.”Meeting of the Round TableThe following Tuesday morning found Kit Harington, who plays the show’s brooding heartthrob, Jon Snow, wandering the grounds of the Four Seasons, dressed in black and hiding his eyes behind dark sunglasses. He vaguely indicated that he and his co-stars had gotten into their own fantastic adventures at the hotel the previous night, though they were “nothing too scandalous.” “We did get thrown out of one room,” Mr. Harington said, “but then we just moved onto the next one.”In the afternoon, cast members were drafted into round-table interview sessions with journalists, where they largely dodged questions about plot points and did their best to entertain themselves.Amid the banter between Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, who plays the roguish Jaime Lannister, and Gwendoline Christie, who plays a warrior named Brienne, it was unclear if they were engaging in a private comedy routine or had genuinely tired of each other’s company. Interrupting an answer from Ms. Christie, Mr. Coster-Waldau asked, “What were you saying?” “You were having a psychotic episode,” Ms. Christie retorted. “I’ve been asleep for three round tables,” Mr. Coster-Waldau explained. “Suddenly I woke up.”That evening called for another red-carpet event at the Chinese Theater. As they rode there in a chauffeured S.U.V., the British teenage actresses Maisie Williams and Sophie Turner were no longer Arya and Sansa Stark, two adolescent sisters forced to grow up before their time; they were simply excited young women who giggled and sang pop songs and exaggerated wildly about their explorations of Los Angeles.“I flew a helicopter for the first time,” Ms. Williams boasted. “I landed it on the second L on the Hollywood sign.”“And then,” Ms. Turner said, “Andrew Garfield came and he was like, ‘Maisie, you’re so amazing, I’m in love with you.’ ”“And then,” Ms. Williams added, “we went and got married in Vegas.”Tech Wizards at the PalaceThat Wednesday, a smaller contingent of “Game of Thrones” actors was flown by private jet to San Francisco, where they explored the foggy city in the afternoon and in the evening were taken to still another red-carpet premiere, this one at the Palace of Fine Arts. The audience on this night included fans who work at top technology companies like Google, Facebook and Yahoo, many of whom consume “Game of Thrones” through on-demand video services like HBO Go, and who identify with its narrative elements as much as its underdog identity. Mike Krieger, a co-founder of Instagram, said he enjoyed the series because life in Silicon Valley was similarly cutthroat — “not quite literally as in this show, but there’s definitely competition, and intrigue and mystery.”More crucially, Mr. Krieger — who first encountered Mr. Martin’s novels as an undergraduate at Stanford and now works at an office with rooms nicknamed after “Game of Thrones” settings, like Dragonstone and the Dothraki Sea — said the success of the show was “very vindicating for a lot of people.”Once, Mr. Krieger said, “people were like, ‘That’s kind of weird that you’re really into reading this book that is the size of your head.’ ” But now, he said, it is “socially cool.” Steve Lee, a project manager for Google’s highly coveted Google Glass device, was explaining to a reporter that “Game of Thrones” was “a sophisticated show, and a lot of people in the Bay Area, who are in tech, can get into a complicated story, an involved story and an evolving story.” Abruptly, he was whisked away by a companion who said she wanted to meet Mr. Coster-Waldau.Music in the Hall of KingsThat Thursday the “Game of Thrones” team boarded another private jet, traveling to still another event, this time in Seattle. Waiting for a party to begin at the EMP Museum, Mr. Benioff recounted how he and Mr. Weiss had won a bet with Mr. Coster-Waldau, who wagered a meal at a highly regarded Danish restaurant that “Game of Thrones” would win the Emmy for best dramatic series last September. (It lost to “Homeland.”) “Alex Gansa might have an Emmy,” Mr. Benioff said, referring to a producer of “Homeland,” “but we have dinner at Noma.”The actors and producers were quietly polite as they were given a private tour around the museum’s collection of artifacts, including items that once belonged to Jimi Hendrix or Kurt Cobain. But a few pairs of eyes got noticeably wider when they were shown a recording studio stocked with working musical instruments. With the party under way, Mr. Benioff, Mr. Weiss, Mr. Harington and another co-star, John Bradley, slipped away from a private skybox overlooking this latest celebration and sneaked back into the studio. Assembling an impromptu cover band with Mr. Weiss on guitar, Mr. Bradley on drums and Mr. Harington on vocals, they excitedly barged their way through performances of the Beatles’ “Come Together” and Pulp’s “Common People.” The perks and perils of a relentless week could wait; right now, they were rock stars.Advertisement