https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/04/learning/our-10th-annual-spring-poetry-contest-for-teenagers-make-a-new-york-times-blackout-poem.html
Our 10th Annual Spring Poetry Contest for Teenagers: Make a New York Times Blackout Poem - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
791
AdvertisementSupported byContestsBy Katherine SchultenEvery April since 2010 we’ve celebrated the joys of spring and National Poetry Month with a found poetry contest.But this year, to celebrate our 10th anniversary, we’re asking that these poems take a new format: instead of using articles from NYTimes.com, we’re inviting students to make blackout poetry from the print paper.Why? Well, this new method has all the literacy goodness of the previous format — the same need for close reading, experimentation with language and attention to detail — but it also celebrates the “daily miracle” that is the print paper, at a time when fewer and fewer young people read the news in print.We know this change will raise questions, so check out the Q. and A. below for answers as well as inspiration. And please post any additional queries in the comment section, or write to us at LNFeeback@nytimes.com. As always when we try something new, we expect our audience will raise issues we haven’t yet considered, so please don’t be shy.Student blackout poems are due by Thursday, May 9, 2019, at 11:59 p.m. Eastern, and must be submitted as photos via the form embedded below.Thank you for participating, and have fun!_________ How is it different from found poetry?A blackout poem is a kind of found poem in that it, too, is verse composed from words and phrases found in another text. But, unlike the digital found poems we asked for in years past, this kind of poetry demands print and a marker. The best explanation we have found is the one in this video, embedded above, by Austin Kleon, who has popularized the method.To see many more examples, take a look at Mr. Kleon’s Newspaper Blackout site.And to experiment yourself, try The Times’s own online blackout poetry-maker. Fun, right?_________• All poems must be created using The New York Times in print. However, you can use any words on any page of any New York Times ever published.So, feel free to use that yellowed copy of the paper currently acting as wrapping for breakable objects in your attic — or use one hot off the presses this week. You can also feel free to make poems from special Times sections like T Magazine or NYT Kids, and you can use any of the words found on any page, including in advertisements.To get started, you might consider what sections of the newspaper interest you most, whether sports, the arts, food, business, global news, science or style, and experiment from there.• All poems must be submitted as photos via the form below.Your image should be no smaller than 1MB and no larger than 5MB, and should be submitted as a JPEG file.Your image should clearly capture all the words of the poem you have created, as well as whatever aspects of the page you’d like to include. Though there is a spot in the form for you to type in your poem just in case, we will be judging based on what we can see in the photo.Please remember that English is read left to right and top to bottom, so make sure your words appear in the order you want them to be read.• All entries must be received by Thursday, May 9, 2019, at 11:59 p.m. Eastern.• Your poem can be as long or short as you like, assuming we can read the words you’ve chosen in the photo you send.• You may give your poem your own original title if you like. The title does not have to be drawn from words on the print page.• You cannot add additional words or marks of punctuation. (Sorry.)• But you can play with shapes, color or other elements of design or illustration. Though we will primarily focus on the poems themselves, we will give some consideration to how the poem is presented. Your blackout should be easy to read, of course, but you can also play with the way the space around the words can enhance their meaning. You can also incorporate all or part of the images already on the page of The Times you’re working with.For instance, maybe you’ll be inspired by work like this, from a group of eighth graders, or imaginative illustrations like this, this or this.• You can also mess with the words you find by blacking out part of them.For example, if you want just the word “play,” but it appears originally as “playing,” feel free to blackout the “ing.”• You can create your poem by yourself or with a group, but we allow only one poem per student.If you are working as a team, just remember to submit all of your names when you post your entry. (And remember that if you’ve created a poem as part of a team, you should not also submit as an individual.)• The winning poems will be featured on The Learning Network.The “prize” for being a winner in this contest is having your work featured on our site, in our newsletter, on Facebook and Twitter and, possibly, in the print New York Times later this year.• The children and stepchildren of New York Times employees, or teenagers who live in the same household as a Times employee, are not eligible to enter this contest.• New for 2019: Our eligible age ranges have changed slightly in response to new data-protection rules in the European Union. Students in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom must be between 13 to 19 years old to participate. However, if you are submitting from anywhere else in the world, you must be between 16 to 19 years old, or use our form, below, to submit to us a parent or guardian’s specific permission. Please see The New York Times’s terms of service for more details._________We’ll be honest: this contest is a bit of an experiment, and we hope you’ll approach it that way.We want you to have fun playing with language and meaning-making. We want you to experiment with choosing different words in different combinations to see how they create new imagery and ideas. We hope you’ll be sensitive to how the space around the words plays into the poem’s meaning, and we hope you’ll recite your work aloud to hear how it sounds. Above all, we hope your creation will show a real love of, and care with, language and what it can do. Please surprise us.So, yes, this is a gamble — but then again, so was the “Show Us Your Generation” photo contest we ran in September, and if you look at what we got for that, you’ll understand why we always bet on teenagers to create remarkable things that go in directions we could never predict.__________________Q. Why are you limiting this to the print New York Times? A. This is the only contest we run all year — or, indeed, have ever run — that demands the print paper, so though we apologize in advance for the burden it may put on you, we’re also excited to see what students will discover.They will be working in a format that most have little experience with, and that many experts predict may soon cease to exist entirely. So consider this, in part, a media-literacy exercise, especially since some research shows that print readers are far better news consumers than digital ones.Q. I don’t have a subscription. Where can I find copies of The Times?A. Most public libraries in the United States carry The Times in print and may be able to give you papers from previous days, weeks or months. Most Starbucks, and most major drugstore, grocery and convenience chains also carry The Times, as do many bookstores.If you do need to buy a copy, you’ll likely just need one. Since students can use any page of the print paper and can compose and submit in groups, a single copy of the weekday Times will give you nearly 50 pages to work with, while the Sunday paper will give you hundreds.Q. Can I just use a photocopy of a page of The Times, or does it have to be the actual paper?A. It has to be the actual paper.One reason for this is that we want students to page through, understand how a print newspaper works, and make their own choices. After a decade of running student contests on this site, we’ve found that the best work always come from teenagers who have been given the most “voice and choice” about what to pick and how to create.(However, if you don’t have many copies of The Times to work with, it’s certainly smart to photocopy some pages for students to practice on before they create their final versions.)Q. I don’t live in the United States, so how do I get a print copy?A. The New York Times International Edition, and International Weekly, are also allowed. (Or, if you can find old copies, you can also use The International Herald Tribune.)_________Yes, many.• First, as we suggested above, have students take a look at Austin Kleon’s site, then invite them to play around with The Times’s own online blackout poetry-maker to get the idea. (Though blackout poetry created that way does not count for the contest.)They might also check out makeblackoutpoetry on Instagram, or explore the history of blackout poetry.• Make sure students experiment quite a bit before they create their final pieces. If you don’t have easy access to The Times, use local newspapers to help them begin to see possibilities.• Since we won’t allow photocopies of the paper, we recommend students either work in pencil first, or make a photocopy to practice with before they create final masterpieces from the print paper. When they’re ready to do the blackout, have them outline the words they’re keeping first, so they don’t accidentally black over them.• This lesson plan, the “Easy Guide to Blackout Poetry,” contains step-by-step instructions, as does this one, written for Scholastic. And this article, from the site Bustle, suggests some excellent tips, such as:• Scan for the most striking words first; those words that stand out, repeat, or speak to the themes you want to explore in your poem.• Don’t feel like you have to read your source document in full — start at the end, jump around, read from right to left; however the muse moves you.• Remember that what you’re eliminating is just as important as what you’re leaving visible. Some blackout poets have even started creating visual art — line drawings, paintings, and more — over the redacted text, instead of simply blacking out the words.In addition, this lesson plan, created for us by two teachers in Arizona who experiment with blackout poetry, is full of ideas for how to help students see the possibility in found poetry in general.• Done with your blackout poems and want more? Here are 21 additional “Ways to Teach and Learn About Poetry With The New York Times.”_________More questions? Write to us at LNFeedback@nytimes.com, or post in the comments.The Learning Network runs contests for teenagers all year long. See our full calendar.Advertisement