https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/17/dining/squash-panade-recipe.html
A New Life for Thanksgiving Ingredients - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
646
AdvertisementSupported byBy David TanisThe fight against food waste is not a new one. Stale bread, for instance, has long been precious in bread-eating cultures, where to waste even a slice is a kind of sin. A hard baguette, a loaf that’s too dry to cut, even the leftover heels and crusts: all have potential in the kitchen.There are lots of traditional recipes meant to use up old bread, which excels at absorbing flavors. There’s panzanella, the Italian bread salad, or fattoush, a Lebanese one made with pita. Spanish migas marries shards of old bread and olive oil. French onion soup, with its cheesy, soup-soaked toast, is among the more well-known strategies.A less-famous dish, but no less praiseworthy, is the panade.Imagine a sturdier onion soup or a soupier lasagna, made with bread instead of pasta, layered with cheese and vegetables, moistened with broth, and baked. Inside, it’s delightfully soggy, while the top is golden, crisp and cheesy. A panade satisfies the way a really good grilled cheese sandwich does, or well-baked macaroni and cheese.This panade is essentially a savory bread pudding interspersed with layers of caramelized onions, winter squash and grated alpine cheese, such as Gruyère or Comté. The onions are the most important part. It’s essential that they be slowly browned and well seasoned, so they add their flavor to the cooking liquid. You could also use another vegetable instead of squash, like stewed tomatoes or cooked leafy greens or sautéed mushrooms.To build this humble dish, you need slices from a sturdy hearth-baked loaf. A large, European-style sourdough whole-wheat bread, made with a wild yeast (levain) starter, is ideal. You can make a panade from day-old slices, but older slices that are completely dried out work fine, too.Nine accomplished writers share their stories of the holiday.If you don’t have stale bread on hand, you can easily “make” it. Keep your sliced bread in a cloth or paper bag, and let it dry slowly. As long as it can breathe, it will not mold. It will be there when you need some homemade bread crumbs or croutons.Water is a fine choice, with so many onions and herbs in the dish, but a quickly made vegetable broth will add another dimension of flavor. Simmer 6 cups water with 2 cups (combined) chopped leeks, onions and celery. Toss in a bay leaf or a thyme sprig and some squash peelings and cook for 30 minutes. But good chicken or beef broth are also options.You might consider a panade as a substitute for bread stuffing and serve it alongside a roasted holiday bird. On other cool days, it shines as a hearty, warming meatless meal, served along with a crisp winter salad and sent to the table in all its molten glory.Recipe: Butternut Squash PanadeFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.cookingAdvertisement