http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/20/us/politics/paul-manafort-trump.html
Trump Aide Paul Manafort Promoted to Campaign Chairman and Chief Strategist - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2433
AdvertisementSupported byBy Maggie Haberman and Ashley ParkerDonald J. Trump has given a broad new role and title to Paul Manafort, the veteran Republican operative he hired in March, ending weeks of confusion within Mr. Trump’s organization about the campaign’s chain of command.Mr. Manafort will now be the campaign’s chairman and chief strategist, according to Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for Mr. Trump. Such titles are generally reserved for a presidential candidate’s highest-ranking advisers.The move, which was first reported by ABC News, formally elevates Mr. Manafort beyond the role for which he was initially hired: managing the convention for Mr. Trump and wrangling delegates to get behind his candidacy.Corey Lewandowski, who has been the campaign manager since Mr. Trump entered the race, will remain in that role, Ms. Hicks said. She told ABC News that Mr. Lewandowski would “continue overseeing day-to-day operations and will work with Manafort on political strategy and communications, among other things, through the general election.”The announcement came after weeks of infighting between loyalists to Mr. Manafort and to Mr. Lewandowski repeatedly drew outside attention and created a distraction for members of the campaign staff.Mr. Manafort has already made substantial changes to the campaign, including hiring the pollster Tony Fabrizio. And on Wednesday, Mr. Trump named Arthur B. Culvahouse Jr., a Washington lawyer, to oversee the vetting of potential running mates.Mr. Culvahouse, who has performed a similar role for Republican nominees since 1976, advised Senator John McCain in 2008 with his vice-presidential vetting process, ultimately recommending Sarah Palin, then the relatively unknown governor of Alaska.Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.Advertisement