https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/21/learning/what-students-are-saying-about-the-college-admissions-cheating-scandal.html
What Students Are Saying About the College Admissions Cheating Scandal - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1346
AdvertisementSupported byCurrent Events ConversationBy The Learning NetworkLast week, federal prosecutors charged 50 people, including Hollywood actresses, business leaders and elite college coaches, in a brazen scheme to buy spots in the freshman classes at elite American universities. Dozens of wealthy parents paid millions of dollars in bribes. Test scores were inflated, essays were falsified and photographs were doctored, all in an illicit effort to gain entry to Yale, the University of Southern California, Stanford, Georgetown and other big name schools.We knew that the middle and high school students who visit our site would have much to say, so we gave them a place to share their reactions in our Student Opinion question, “What Is Your Reaction to the College Admissions Cheating Scandal?”We received nearly 500 comments from students across the country — making it one of our most-commented writing prompts ever.Most said they were appalled, but not surprised. Others, many of whom are in the process for applying to colleges right now, shared how the news has changed their views of the supposed meritocracy of college admissions. And still others used sharp analysis to explain why, as one commenter put it, “if there’s anywhere this could have happened it would have been the United States.”While we usually highlight three of our most popular writing prompts in our Current Events Conversation, this week we are only rounding up comments for this one prompt so we can honor the many students who wrote in.Thank you to all the new classes who chimed in this week: Carlisle, Penn.; Caruthers High School, Calif.; Inman, S.C.; Landrum High School, S.C.; Los Angeles, Calif.; and Riverside, Calif.And, we’d like to give a special shout out to students from Holicong Middle School who responded to commenter after commenter with affirmation and questions that kept the conversation going in interesting directions.Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear as they were originally submitted.__________I am absolutely shocked and angered to learn that this pure corruption can occur in the college admissions process. Those responsible for this ludicrous scandal do not understand the point of college at all. College or university is an opportunity earned through an impartial process.— Isabel Li, Temple City, CAWhile I am not surprised, I am appalled that this has been going on for years and that parents and people with money feel the entitlement they do. Thousands of students across the country, myself included, work tirelessly at several jobs, are heavily active in their communities, and maintain high and REAL grades and scores just to have a sliver of a chance to be accepted to our dream school, and to be able to afford it without an enormous amount of student debt.— Emily Sedlak, Carlisle, PennsylvaniaOne of the details that shocked me the most is that one of the parents claimed that their son had a learning disability. This is not only unethical, but this is very disrespectful to those who do have learning disabilities.I am kind of surprised that something like this happened in the United States because this is not what America is all about. The reason that America started is because we were being cheated out of our freedoms.— Abby G., Inman, SCHeart-wrenching human indecency — absolute disregard for the law or for the students of America— utter disrespect for themselves and their children — all accurate ways to describe the parents, administrators, and coaches that were active participants in the college entry fraud scandal … These parents stole opportunities from students who were deserving of better, and frankly, I am appalled to say that I’m not surprised in the slightest.— Nicole Hudak, Lakewood, OHWhile I feel like I’ve always sort-of known the influence money can and does have on admissions decisions, seeing such a gross abuse of power laid out in such detail is frustrating.— Robbie Kane, The Galloway SchoolFamilies travel to the United States in hope for better opportunities for them and their children, students work hard long, hours to bring up their grades and prepare for tests, yet many of these students don’t get into the schools of their choice. It is horrible to think that these innocent people lost their chance to someone who didn’t get into the school fairly.— Anya Finlay, Masterman, Philadelphia, PAI have a very strong opinion on this one that can be boiled down to three simple words.It’s not fair.A simple opinion? Yes. Childish? Maybe a little. Incorrect? Not in the slightest.Students work hard to get into college. They constantly push to achieve their dreams. They sacrifice time, sleep, and even their passions just to get where they want to go.Sometimes they don’t get in. It’s sad, but it happens, and it often means that the person who did get in worked harder, and that the person who didn’t get in might need to work harder. That’s fair.What isn’t fair is a hardworking student not getting into the school of their dreams because they weren’t born with deep pockets.That’s unfair.— Thomas D., J.T. Hoggard High SchoolNot only am I mad, but I am also sympathetic. Going through life without obstacles is gonna come back to bite … hard.What really got to me was the fact that hard working students who deserved spots at these amazing schools got laid off by a bunch of rich, privileged kids whose mommy and daddy obviously buy their way through life.Meanwhile these students spend hours on homework, months on their applications, and the only support they get from mom and dad is probably a “you’re doing great sweetie” because you know what? They are doing great! They are prepared for obstacles and hardships, unlike the girl whose parents paid 200,000 dollars for a spot on a rowing team, or the boy whose parents paid 50,000 to make sure he passed his tests.— Gracie Sistrunk, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NCWhen learning about the scandal, I am not surprised that something like this happened in the United States because there are many people in the country that are willing to do whatever to help their kids be successful. Going to college can mean success in today’s world.— Camden S., SCBreaking news about people with money and power using their money and power for their own gain is not breaking news because it is nothing new.— Reuben C, Burlington, VermontI don’t see why this is very shocking to most people—I feel like it is pretty well known that students often lie in a variety of situations. Whether it is to get a job by putting something down on your resume that you never did or lying about income to get free lunch and lowered AP test prices; students (at least from what I see) are always lying to help benefit themselves. This fact doesn’t necessarily bother me just because it is so prominent in my school and I assume in other schools as well.— Sarah, Buena Park, CAI am more surprised at how long this took before being discovered because of the amount of people involved in the scandal. I am also surprised at the fact that other students are astonished at this. Yes, this was a major scandal and one of the largest college admissions scandals but history has shown us time and time again that many people, no matter what era, will be willing to cut corners or find the easy way out (or in this case, in) of a situation whether it be legally or illegally.— Mia Beam, King Highschool Riverside CAI’m a little surprised that something like this would happen in America but not much. With the number of wealthy people who are always trying to find a way to cheat the system whether it be taxes, loans, or even schools it was bound to happen someday.— Evan Thompson, Mabry Middle, Inman, South CarolinaMy reaction to the whole situation is kind of like “oh well”. Stuff like this happens all the times where people use their resources to ensure a better future for their family, it’s been happening for centuries. Anytime you have a capitalist functions society then you will have people taking advantage of the system by using their assets.— Frank Lyons, HoggardAs someone who is preparing to apply to college soon, this is extremely disheartening to say the least. It can make me feel worse about my chances of getting into a college I would like to. It is discouraging knowing there have been many people in our country to cheat the system of applying to college and making it in when they do not deserve it but they can get it based off of family wealth …I am the type of person where every grade I receive makes me think of how it will affect my chances at getting into a good college. Seeing this scandal that went on makes me question if my hard work going into impressing colleges will even matter.— Brennan McCauley, Hoggard High SchoolAs a high school student beginning the college admissions process, these dishonorable acts dishearten my confidence and leave me regarding every sleepless night and study session as meaningless, able to be signed away by a simple paycheck. This also speaks to the nationwide emphasis on the country’s top schools as a means of future success and affluence. Teenagers are constantly pressured by both their families and society to go to big-name colleges, a task so competitive that many resort to cheating and bribing. Not only does the admissions process itself require reconsideration, but the entire attitude towards “name-brand” schools must be observed for its toxicity.— Izzy, VermontPersonally, I am very upset by the fact that college admissions are susceptible to bribery. I believe that I work harder than most kids, and I push myself for the purpose of maintaining good grades so I can get into decent colleges. I also try to participate in many sports, clubs, etc. to add to my college resume. It make me very upset that some colleges gave an advantage to kids who do not work as hard as I do and might not get grades as good as mine simply because their parents can cough up a large sum of money.— JB, BahrenburgWhen something is put on a pedestal, there is bound to be people cutting corners to reach it.I am in a SAT prep course and it has been mostly funded by my grandmother. I am very grateful for my privilege and I will work to have it well finished.— Chris Llanos, VTWhen I first heard about the scandal, I was shock and in disbelief, but then I thought about it and I wasn’t surprise. It is no lie the college system is corrupt. While college is suppose to be a place of continuing learning and growth, it became a business industry where money talks.Knowing this information is concerning to me as a high school junior because my peers and I are going to be applying to colleges soon, and I know that most of us do not have enough money to “buy our way” into college. It is also disheartening because I know that many of us actually try our hardest to get good grades, do well in our respected extracurricular like sports, juggle many AP classes, and so much more, but there are kids that are able to have mommy or daddy pay someone to fake their resume and SAT scores which is wrong …There is nothing wrong with a parent paying their child’s college tuition when they get in rightfully, but cheating to get your child into college with bribery is wrong and shows how corrupt the college system is, making it hard to know what colleges are built for;educating or becoming a money-making empire.— Lola Adebayo, Providence, RIWhen I look at this, I feel really bad. Students like me work really hard for our future, while some kids who don’t try at all are given the opportunity to go to the top colleges without putting in an ounce of sweat. I stress every day thinking about getting into college and knowing that it could be taken away because of people like this is terrifying.— Dalton M., Inman, SCIf parents with students who have access to nothing but the very best coaches, tutors, private schools, etc. need to blow millions of dollars on rigging tests, doctoring photos, and so on, just so that is enough to get them into Ivy League universities; what does that mean for students who have nothing to rely on but their “God-given gifts.”Articles like these begin to worry me; as a high school sophomore already starting to think about the college admissions process, it is very unnerving when your parents aren’t exactly millionaires and you have Ivy League dreams that seem to become more unachievable and more unfair by the day with more and more examples like these of how cutthroat the education system is.— Leila Belfadil, Hoggard High School, Wilmington NCI know I’m going to have to work SUPER hard to have a chance to get into any of these colleges, and it’s truly heart-wrenching to see all these “athletes” and legacies get into these amazing places, purely based on the connections they have. I wish this weren’t the case, but whatever will happen, will happen, and all I can do is try my best and put my right foot forward. If these places are too blinded by money to see the hard work of thousands of kids around the country, who are practically dying to get into their school, that they deny them acceptance, it’s their loss, not mine.— Anna Praticò, J. R. Masterman, PhiladelphiaAlthough this scandal is ridiculous , it does not make me steer away from college. I will not let the desperate actions of others determine my future success as a student.— Samantha Drake, King High School, CABoth the legal and illegal bribery is unethical, and sends a terrible message. It says to kids that they are not good enough on their own, right before sending them out to be alone and separate from their families for the first time in their lives. They are entering a place where they are supposed to be learning and shaping their own opinions and thoughts, and they’re put their by the same restrictions and privileges they have had their entire lives.— Audrey, Hoggard High SchoolThe biggest message in this scandal is that no matter how hard you work, there’s probably someone less qualified that will get in due to their parent’s money or influence.— Isabelle, RiversideOne of the biggest lessons I’ve learned in my life is that hard work can take you a long way. Apparently, people with money don’t need to teach their children that lesson.— z, caruthersThis scandal sends a bad image to the youth saying that money can get you anything in life. Students should learn that hard work is what pays off in the end and gets you places. I feel bad for the people that work the hardest but are less fortunate when it comes to money. They won’t get the college opportunity they deserve, while the wealthy and lazy people get whatever they want, with no work put in.— Sophia Southerland, Hoggard High School, Wilmington NCI think the scandal sends the message to high school students that their will always be someone out there to try and do something the wrong or easy way. The biggest take away is that you need to do things that right or they may be severe consequences.— J.Simmons, SDSACollege admission are cutthroat for a reason. Only the best and brightest should be admitted into the elite of schools; however, it seems that in many cases, wealth, power, and status are prioritized. This unfair and unfortunate precedent is sending a message to the students of America. A message about the competitive and money driven world we live in. A world in which hard word doesn’t always pay off, and there is no guarantee of success, especially when up against wealth. Is this the message we want to be sending to the students of our future?— Ava Clause, Lakewood, OhioOne of the messages it sends is that money isn’t everything. You can try and buy your way through life but it won’t last very long.— Abigail Billings, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NCIt hurts to think that a student who prepared him or herself, who studied for countless hours every night, and to who college ultimately mattered more was not granted the right to an equal opportunity to achieve his or her dream.The whole American notion that if one works hard enough, he or she will accomplish all that he or she desires is false … This scandal proves that the rich and wealthy are privileged and will continue to be because they pave the same path for their kids, even if that means robbing the chance for another kid to pave his or her own path.The scandal hurt me, but it did not shock me. It proved what many of us were in denial of: Working hard just isn’t enough sometimes. But this scandal can enlighten and influence people to be proactive and sympathetic so that the rich staying rich doesn’t mean the poor has to stay poor. Students are told to study, and if they cheat, they will be punished. It’s not a difficult concept to grasp. Every person who participated in this cheating should be punished.— Yessenia, Rhode IslandIn America there is a huge separation between the small amount of very rich and the large amount of very poor. This allows people who can pay their way into spots that they do not deserve to stay on top of society while people who worked hard for these spots get pushed out.— Amalia T., Masterman, PhiladelphiaSome in our society have become increasingly consumed with wealth, upward mobility at any cost and worse of all the aim to achieve those with complete disregard for hard work or honesty. As a result we see financial scandals at all levels. What’s so sad is that some (who are financially capable) are willing to encourage and teach their kids the acts of dishonesty and avoidance of hard work.This scandal is punch to the gut for high school graduates and their families who struggle to borrow funds for their kids to get into mediocre schools. Cheating denies all of us the opportunity to teach and train a future doctor, teacher or scientist who did not get into or can afford college tuition etc. Those found guilty of participating in this exposed crime need to fund a scholarship at the school their kids applied to for displaced students in the amount the paid in the scheme or pay to the full extent of the law.— Archie, Long Island, NYWe live in a society where your family and wealth determine how you will be treated in society, this just shows you can do whatever you want- if the price is right- if you have money.— Ava Walger, Hoggard High School, NCIts very similar to our current political system today … I’m not surprised this happened in the United States, after all, it is home to some of the best universities and some of the richest people, put 2 and 2 together and you have bribery scandals.— Brett H., Riverside, CAIf there’s anywhere this could have happened it would have been the United States: here the admissions process is so rigorous and so much importance is placed on going to a good college that it’s completely understandable to want to give your child more security when it comes to admissions.Overall, it’s not just the admissions process but the entire system that is rigged to favor the wealthy: more money means access to better education, private tutoring, and the resources to put a child through an expensive college. While financial aid and affirmative actions can alleviate this issue, it’s clearly skewed to favor those with more money rather than more innate talent or achievement. As for me, the main message that I can takeaway from this is that the admissions system for high-level colleges is even more unfair than I thought.— Owen Bardeen, CAThe cheating scandal is horrific at best, but no one should be suprised. The United States has created a society where everyone is constantly in competition with one another to become the best. The elite stay elite, while those who struggle can only make it if hard work is put in. The college admissions process is not fair because nothing is fair in the real world. Someone always has an advantage in some way …We have created a mentality that we must be the best at all costs. Grades are valued over integrity, and alternative facts prevail over truth. Constant comparisons make us become desperate to be perfect.— Mia M., Martin Luther King HighThis news of bribery in high level colleges seems like a scandal that nobody had seen coming, as it is portrayed as such, but really this was all bound to happen. Upper class citizens have had a leg up in our society since the beginning of time. There has always been a divide, ever since humans organized ourselves by the amount of money in our bank accounts and no way to bridge the divided between poor and wealthy. The more money that you have, the luckier you are.— Dana Mormando, Hoggard High School, Wilmington NCThis country revolves around money and wealth, and people will do anything with it, and to get it. And that’s where the problems starts. If we actually don’t try to do something to change this, this world is just going to come up with different ways of doing things that are wrong, because of money. I just feel bad for the students that are actually trying their best. Some people don’t even have the opportunity for education, and our country is taking advantage of that … So if we want to change something, it must start with us first.— Naiima Jabati, Julia R. Masterman, PhiladelphiaThe college admissions scandal is peak white privilege. These white parents have all the money and opportunities in the world and still choose to cheat their children into college.— Payton Rossen, Lakewood, OhioI am not at all surprised by this scandal. And I didn’t find anything that was shocking in this article and not at all shocked that something like this happened in the United States because they chose Donald J Trump as president and can buy guns is some states without any papers.— YF, Tbilisi,GeorgiaThe parents who lied and bribed are not actually helping their children, or else their children would have known about it in the first place. They are just making their children into flower vases. Pretty and attractive on the outside, hollow on the inside. In order to truly make their children succeed in life, maybe they should actually help them learn.— Sarah Wong, Julia R Masterman, PhiladelphiaEven if their children wanted to get into these schools, after even the first few weeks, they will feel out of place, or even think themselves as “stupid” because they were falsely put into these schools. Because of this, there could even be negative mental side effects such as anxiety and panic attacks that would severally worsen their lives.— Daniel Morozov, Holicong Middle School, PAThe aspect of the scandal that struck me the most was the cases where the children did not know that their parents altered their SAT scores. It would be crushing to know that you did not actually deserve your place at your school.— Caroline, VermontIt’s bad when even your parents think you’re stupid … I’m a little surprised this happen because you would think that because the parents worked hard to acquire their wealth that they would want their kids to work hard too. But at the same time, I’m not that surprised because there are a lot of really spoiled kids in the U.S. These kids don’t work for anything, they get everything handed to them.— Diego B., FresnoIf I were that teen, I would wonder if my parents really were proud of me or if they thought I wasn’t good enough.— Lauren H., Inman, South CarolinaI think all parents want the best for their children. However, I do not think that paying for their children’s work is the best way to help them, since facilitating their work only makes them lazy and inexperienced in real life. In addition, they are depriving them of the satisfaction that gives them something to achieve and the opportunity to demonstrate their abilities. I think that striving to achieve a dream is a path full of life lessons that often improve us as people. Our society needs people with a dynamic, progressive attitude, who know how to survive and develop in society.— keyri 3A, YC CLIPThere’s a reason that colleges like Yale and Harvard only pick the best of the best; because that’s who their classes are designed for. In my opinion, this scheme doesn’t benefit the student, because going through a “side door” in the admission process doesn’t mean that they will be able to keep up with the rigors of a prestigious university. I’m just saying, if you’re paying $1.2 billion in bribes, what does that say about your child’s academic abilities? Why not put that money into good tutors instead?— Brian E., Masterman, Philadelphia, PAI feel sorry for everyone in this situation. The parents, because they feel as if this is the only way to create happiness for their children, the students because some had no idea, and especially those students who worked so hard and got pushed out by those with more money to spare.— Alex Lee, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NCThe elite are already given special treatment. I would’ve thought that their money alone would have proven to be a great asset in the college admissions process. I think that wealth in general serves as a great advantage in the college admissions process. I know, for example, that only those that are wealthy and can secure great payments can apply Early Decision to colleges. The majority of people can not afford to apply Early Decision, because this is binding and upon acceptance the student must forfeit his or her other applications.— Caroline Gracia, Providence RIIt has long been the case that students of wealthier families are much more likely to attend elite universities, and there are often special privileges afforded the children of wealthy donors to these top institutions, and so the concept of essentially bribing a kid’s way to college was something I saw as simply an extension, albeit a truly criminal one, of those pre-existing special conditions.This issue stems largely from not only the corruption of a few officials, but from the higher education system as a whole. Over the past few decades, the college admissions process has become one massive competition, pitting students, peers, from across the country against each other, and while competition is not inherently wrong, the issue that has sprung up is that the process controls a student’s entire life, making many of their decisions for them.Many students are forced to make decisions not based on what they most enjoy, but what would look best on a college application. That is what is inherently wrong. Adding corruption further endangers these students’ lives, and makes their decisions not matter at all. Something must be done in order to make our education system one that works for all americans, not just the wealthiest.— Aeddon, ProvidenceAs a student who takes rigorous courses and works very hard to get good grades and a transcript that stands out to college administrators, it is almost frustrating to hear that others get “accepted” into universities based on false facts. I believe students should be accepted into colleges based on their merit and their skill, not the amount of money they are willing to pay to fake their way in. Some students who were accepted by these means were shown to not even care about the education they will be provided, but only for the “college experience.” If this is what these students are looking for it would be just as easy to be accepted into a less prestigious school without cheating their way in.— Matilda Morris, Walla Walla WAHarvard and many other top universities have long been employing race-based affirmative action to create diverse student bodies. While this has been effective in gaining a more racially-representative student body, there is still a huge amount of socioeconomic inequality.Top universities need to end their policies of race-based affirmative action and turn them into socioeconomic-based policies. They need to stop discriminating based on race and start giving middle and low-income people a chance for admission.Only when top colleges swap their race-based affirmative action policies for socioeconomic ones will the unfair advantages of the wealthy be nullified, and only then will their student bodies be truly diverse.— Sebastian Zagler, John T Hoggard High School Wilmington NCAre we really that surprised? In a culture that persistently propagates the idea that elite college admissions are the only key to success, in a culture that ascribes immense status to traditional centers of academic achievement, in a culture that has always supported the wealthy attending selective schools, no, we shouldn’t be surprised.Ivy League acceptance rates were once well over 50%, and with numbers now approaching less than one tenth of that previous mark, it is apparent that something must have changed … In decades past it was only the wealthy who were able to send their children to the elite private high schools that nearly guaranteed admittance to Ivy League caliber institutions. It should come as no surprise that this same mentality is now in conflict with modern holistic admissions.However, these ideas about status and education are not just the result of rich parents who want the best for their children; their actions are motivated by a culture that irrationally overvalues specific schools. Consider the Supreme Court, on which every single justice has attended at some point either Harvard Law or Yale Law (or both).— Evan Bell, Lakewood, OhioEven as the rich are getting richer, and their privilege skyrockets, 50 SAT/ACT prep coaches, parents, and test administrators felt the need to ensure their child’s spot in Ivy League schools such as Harvard and Yale. Imagine the mediocrity: rich, mostly white, most likely christian students with all of the privileges they need to be successful needing to cheat to get into a good college.We are fed lies that affirmative action takes away the right of hard working Americans to get into college, that financial aid and other such programs that help the poor and disadvantaged people of our country are taking away that right from Americans to get into college. However, as it has almost always been, the rich are feeding these lies to the poor to keep them poor, while the rich prosper, the rich get into good colleges, and the rich live lives full of advantages.— Jason Melnick, Lakewood Public HighschoolWhen was the last time a new college was made that I was made aware of? My parents always tell me, “Apply for UC’s” or basically go to colleges that are already established. I’m not sure if new credible colleges are being made, but I definitely think that if it could happen it could lower competition, and in the end lower situations like this. No one will have to reach such desperate or cheap measures to get their kid into college.— Edward F., TorranceAdvertisement