https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/01/world/middleeast/israel-boycott-divestment-sanctions.html
Israeli Officials Seek Ways to Combat Boycott Effort - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2119
AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneUNITED NATIONS — Alarmed at the spread of a Palestinian campaign to boycott Israel and particularly its resonance on college campuses, the Israeli Mission to the United Nations and World Jewish Congress held a conference on Tuesday aimed at galvanizing support for an effective countermessage.Precisely what that countermessage will be, and how it can successfully be conveyed, were among the goals discussed at the conference, titled “Build Bridges, Not Boycotts,” held at the United Nations headquarters.Many of the speakers and guests, who included Jewish students, educators and policy experts, agreed that the Palestinian campaign, known as the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement, or B.D.S., had made popular inroads that Israel advocates had failed to stop.A range of speakers, including Danny Danon, Israel’s United Nations ambassador, and Ronald S. Lauder, the president of the World Jewish Congress, described B.D.S. as a dishonest effort to delegitimize and destroy Israel.Mr. Danon called B.D.S. “the 21st-century incarnation of an old disease: anti-Semitism.” Mr. Lauder described B.D.S. activists as hypocrites who should be exposed “through every means possible.”At the same time, there was an acknowledgment at the conference that the B.D.S. movement is not monolithic and is supported by some who also may support Israel’s right to exist. B.D.S. backers include some church groups as well as Jews who are sympathetic to Palestinian aspirations for statehood and are strongly critical of Israeli government policies.“Not every Jew who supports B.D.S. is an ignorant, self-hating Jew,” David M. Sable, the global chief executive of Y & R Advertising Inc., said during a panel about the B.D.S. message on campuses and how to respond.Mr. Sable, a strong opponent of B.D.S., bluntly criticized the approaches taken so far to present Israel’s side of the story, which he said were not working.“B.D.S. is driving the conversation, and the anti-B.D.S. side is reactionary,” he said. “Ours is a negative message, just not that inviting. We look like a corporate brochure. So we have a problem, my friends.”Frank Luntz, a Republican political consultant and public opinion specialist, told the conference that his own data suggested that the B.D.S. effort to ostracize Israel was winning more sympathy in the United States.“This is the Palestinian narrative,” Mr. Luntz said. “This is what happens if you remain silent.”The conference was held against the backdrop of a prolonged deadlock in the process for a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as well as a hawkish political shift in the Israeli government, already dominated by right-wing parties.Mr. Danon said in a telephone interview before the conference that he had been motivated to organize it partly because of what he described as a B.D.S. expansion at the United Nations.He pointed to a measure passed by the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva a few months ago to establish a database identifying companies doing business in Israeli settlements. The database, which some Israel officials have described as a blacklist, was viewed as a victory by the B.D.S. movement.The conference, Mr. Danon said, was meant “to send a clear message that we have to fight.”Riyad H. Mansour, the Palestinian ambassador to the United Nations, said in a telephone interview that he was paying little attention to the conference, which he described as a futile effort by Mr. Danon and his associates.“He is trying to convince the international community to promote occupation, and the international community is saying this Israeli occupation has to end,” Mr. Mansour said.Naomi Dann, a spokeswoman for the Jewish Voice for Peace, a group that supports B.D.S., said the high level of planning for the conference was “a sign of the growing power of the B.D.S. movement.”Follow Rick Gladstone on Twitter @rickgladstone. Advertisement