https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/31/climate/ocean-temperatures-hotter.html
Scientists Find a New Way to Take the Oceans’ Temperature - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2104
AdvertisementSupported byBy Kendra Pierre-LouisEditors’ Note: November 14, 2018An earlier version of this article included a conclusion from a study about ocean warming that is now in doubt. The researchers are working to revise their study because of errors detected in their calculations and it appears unlikely that they will be able to support their original conclusion that the oceans have warmed an average of 60 percent more per year than the current official estimates by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The sections of the article dealing with that conclusion have been removed and the headline has been updated.How do you take the ocean’s temperature?The question might sound like the prelude to a children’s joke. But for climate scientists, the answer has serious consequences. Climate change is rapidly warming the world’s oceans, killing off aquatic organisms — like coral reefs and kelp forests — that anchor entire ecosystems. The warmer waters also cause sea levels to rise and make extreme weather events like hurricanes more destructive.In October, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the global organization for climate data, released a major report predicting that some of the worst effects of climate change — including coastal flooding, food shortages and a mass die-off of coral reefs — could come to pass as soon as 2040 if human greenhouse gas emissions continue at current levels. The I.P.C.C. report showed that scientists may have been underestimating the severity of the world’s present climate trajectory.If scientists can more accurately measure the speed at which oceans are warming, they can better predict the future effects of climate change.A study published Wednesday in the journal Nature, led by Laure Resplandy, a biogeochemical oceanographer at Princeton University, used a new approach that derived ocean temperatures by measuring the levels of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the atmosphere.Those gases dissolve in ocean waters, but the amount the ocean can hold depends on its temperature. “As the ocean has been warming, it’s basically pushing out oxygen and carbon dioxide,” said David Nicholson, an associate scientist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution who was not involved in the study.As Dr. Resplandy put it: “If you leave a Coke outside in the sun, it’s going to warm and it’s going to lose the gas. It’s a little bit the same idea.”Scientists normally measure ocean temperatures using thermometers, but stitching together a global temperature record requires thermometers around the globe. Global temperature records were spotty before 2007, when an international consortium began a program, known as Argo, creating an international network of ocean-temperature-measuring instruments. But a group from Scripps Institution of Oceanography had been taking careful measurements of atmospheric carbon dioxide since 1991, for unrelated reasons. Dr. Resplandy and her team used that data set for this study.Dr. Nicholson said the study was an example of how collecting data now can have unexpected benefits later. “It kind of supports the importance of collecting these long-term time series even if it isn’t apparent at the start what the outcome will be,” he said.This year is on track to be the third consecutive hottest year on record. Where does that heat go? The oceans, mostly.There are some caveats. This is a novel approach, and it is unclear if it will hold up to further scrutiny. Kevin E. Trenberth, a senior scientist in the Climate Analysis Section at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, noted that the methodology works best over long periods of time but does not detail what happens year to year.Dr. Resplandy said her work did not upend the I.P.C.C. report’s warnings that humanity has only a couple of decades to ward off some of climate change’s most catastrophic effects.“It doesn’t change the results,” she said. “What it does is that it makes it harder to get there.”For more news on climate and the environment, follow @NYTClimate on Twitter.Kendra Pierre-Louis is a reporter on the climate team. Before joining The Times in 2017, she covered science and the environment for Popular Science.  @kendrawrites Advertisement