https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/06/dining/antipasto-is-the-overture-to-classic-italian-meals.html
Antipasto Is the Overture to Breezy Italian-Style Entertaining - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2107
AdvertisementSupported byCity KitchenBy David TanisAn Italian meal begins with the antipasto. Meant to awaken the palate and stave off initial hunger pangs, it could just be a simple platter of sliced cured meats and a few olives.But often it is more complex, with a few chicken liver crostini or tomato-topped bruschette, perhaps, or marinated olives and anchovies, or all manner of colorful savory vegetable salads. Antipasti normally arrive on platters to be shared, an enticing and festive sight.The antipasto table found in old-fashioned Italian restaurants is a sort of precursor to the modern-day salad bar, though usually far better and certainly more beautifully presented. The idea is to let customers serve themselves (or be served by the maître d’ hôtel) a few spoonfuls of room-temperature vegetable dishes — grilled eggplant, roasted peppers, lightly pickled artichoke hearts, sautéed mushrooms — along with a little cheese and salumi. There’s something very welcoming about it. It’s an attractive concept to adopt at home for a dinner party, too. The advantages are obvious: Everything is prepared ahead, and there’s no fussing. Serve it buffet style and let guests choose, or on individual plates as a composed salad-like first course. Though many Italian delicatessens offer ready-made generic antipasto platters, I recommend curating your own; it’s more interesting and you get only what you really want. Change the vegetables seasonally. In spring, for an extremely simple antipasto, use crisp sliced fennel, blanched asparagus and snap peas and charred young onions, drizzled with fruity olive oil. Choose the very freshest mozzarella, burrata or ricotta. These cheeses (serve just one kind or several) must be absolutely pristine, with no sour notes; buy them the day you intend to serve them, and make sure they are at cool room temperature, not straight from the fridge, to accentuate their milky sweetness. Purchase thinly sliced prosciutto, salame, mortadella or lardo the same day, too. Of course, in some cases, antipasti don’t necessarily precede a meal. At a wine bar, they may be the only thing offered. (Steal that idea if you’re having a stand-up informal affair.) Their role, like that of tapas in Spain, is as an accompaniment to drinks, ordered one small plate at a time, all night long. Recipes: Spring Antipasto Platter | More Spring DishesMore recipes can be found on NYT Cooking, where you can browse, search and save more than 17,000 recipes. You can also sign up for our Cooking email newsletter, and download the iPad app. Sign up to receive the NYT Living newsletter, a weekly roundup of lifestyle news from the Style, Travel and Food sections delivered to your inbox.cookingAdvertisement