https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/06/fashion/compression-socks-and-hose-are-no-longer-for-grandma.html
Compression Socks and Hose Are No Longer for Grandma - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1533
AdvertisementSupported byBy Shivani VoraEven though she wears granny tights, Jamie Rubin, 43, fits no one’s definition of dowdy.As the director of United States sales for the French designer Isabel Marant, Ms. Rubin travels to Paris at least four times a year on business. The many hours spent sitting in a cramped airplane seat often leave her legs and ankles swollen and puffy.In preparation for her most recent sojourn to France, this past September for Paris Fashion Week, Ms. Rubin decided to try compression tights — the thick hose and socks often favored by older people or those trying to address circulation problems.Not wanting to be the victim of swollen ankles or poor style, Ms. Rubin searched the Internet for alternatives to frumpy tights and found Item m6, a maker of fashion-forward compression wear. She bought a pair of tights for $88. “I got a super-chic charcoal gray pair, and now that I know what they do, I will never go back to not wearing compression when I travel,” she said.Until recently, compression tights were sold mostly at pharmacies as well as retailers catering to older men and women. The tights and socks are snug-fitting hosiery made from tightly woven materials like cotton and nylon. They are meant to help increase circulation in the legs and minimize the swelling that can result from prolonged sedentariness.Long a medical necessity for some pregnant women and others who are at risk for deep-vein thrombosis or blood clots, the tights are now beginning to come into vogue among stylish women who sit on uncomfortably small airplane seats during long-haul travel.Dr. David L. Green, a hematologist at NYU Langone Medical Center who specializes in clotting, says that compression wear can significantly reduce the chances of clots because it applies external pressure to the veins, increases circulation and prevents blood from pooling. There are aesthetic benefits too. “Legs can look puffy after flying, and it takes at least a few days for that to go away, but with the socks, they might not swell at all,” he said.As a result, the tights can make a broad impact on women’s travel wardrobes. In the past, when flying abroad for international fashion shows, Connie Wang, Refinery29’s style director, would pack a lot of pants. “I used to wear looser-fit trousers to disguise the cankles I’d get from six-hour-plus flights,” said Ms. Wang, 27. By wearing the tights, she is now able to step off the plane and into skirts, she said.Functional accessories like binding tights have recently made their way onto the runway and into store windows. At the Spring 2015 shows this fall, models for Jil Sander, Prada and Dolce & Gabbana sported knee-high socks in leather, print and lace. The British designer Mark Fast dressed models in Item m6 black pique striped ankle socks in his Fall/Winter 2014 London runway show in February.“Those deep-v cardigans, plaid pants and plain collared shirts — stuff that your grandpa might have worn in the 1970s — have been in vogue for a while now for men, and now this senior citizen style is finally spilling over to women,” said Hitha Prabhakar, the founder of AitchPe Retail Advisory. “The socks and tights might have dowdy roots, but the look is actually very chic casual.”After developing a clot in her leg during a flight from Los Angeles to New York City, Kelsey Minarik created RejuvaHealth, a hosiery company in Irvine, Calif. “I had to wear the ugliest compression tights and socks as part of my treatment, so I decided to come up with ones that I would be excited to be out in public in,” she said. Her $29.99 to $69.99 line includes knee-high, argyle, chestnut-hued socks for men, and sheer black pantyhose with a floral motif for women.To create items that heed at least modest attention to fashion, Vim & Vigr, a compression-socks company located in Missoula, Mont., hires style-conscious designers who have worked at labels such as Ralph Lauren and Tommy Hilfiger, said the company’s founder, Michelle Huie. Its red-and-black polka-dot cotton socks for women are knit in a trademarked “Gradient Pressure” compression-building process and cost $29.95.Item m6, the line that now counts Ms. Rubin among its customers, was recently started in the United States by Medi, an 80-year-old German compression legwear company. The pieces are priced from $34 to $108 and include ankle- and knee-high socks, tights and leggings in colors such as coral and black shimmer, and patterns like zigzag and chess.The availability of more contemporary versions of the granny tights is welcome news for earlier adopters. Kate Davidson Hudson, 32, the co-founder of the eCommerce accessory site Editorialist, says that the old-school prescriptive knee-highs were a staple on her work trips when she was recently pregnant because she did not know about the snazzier kinds. “I definitely plan on buying a pair for my upcoming travels,” she said. “My legs used to feel better after I took my socks off than before I put them on, and now that they do double duty as a piece of fashion, you can’t really go wrong wearing them.”Advertisement