https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/16/t-magazine/george-rr-martin-qanda-game-of-thrones.html
George R. R. Martin Answers Times Staffers’ Burning Questions - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1684
AdvertisementSupported byThe writer discloses where he gets his signature hats and the “Game of Thrones” character that reminds him the most of Trump.Produced by Jamie Sims“If you could ask George R. R. Martin anything, what would it be?” This was the question that T posed to New York Times employees ahead of our Oct. 21 Greats issue, which features the author on one of its six different covers. The overwhelming number of responses revealed just how many “Game of Thrones” superfans are lurking in the newspaper’s bureaus, from New York to Washington, D.C., to Mexico City. We selected a handful of staffers’ queries for Martin to field on the set of his cover photo shoot, in Santa Fe, N.M., and filmed a number of his responses for the video above. Below are all of the questions that Martin answered — or, in some cases, tellingly declined to answer. Here’s what he had to say about his favorite books, where he gets his signature hats and the “Game of Thrones” character that reminds him the most of Trump.Dowd: Who reminds you most of Trump? Dan Weiss [one of the “Game of Thrones” creators and writers] told me that the character that reminded him the most of Trump is Hodor because he endlessly repeats his own name.Martin: Well, that’s amusing. But I think even during the campaign I said that Trump reminded me most of Joffrey. They have the same level of emotional maturity. And Joffrey likes to remind everyone that he’s king. And he thinks that gives him the ability to do anything. And we’re not an absolute monarchy, like Westeros is. We’re a constitutional republic. And yet, Trump doesn’t seem to know what that means. He thinks the presidency gives him the power to do anything. And so, yeah, Joffrey is Trump.Dowd: I wonder how “Game of Thrones” provides insights into the mind-sets and strategies of modern-day geopolitics?Martin: I’ll pass on that one.Dowd: What’s with you and redheads?Martin: I like redheads! I’m married to a redhead. And I’ve known other redheads in the past. But I also like blondes and brunettes and other people, even women who occasionally shave their heads. So there’s — I think redheads are amazing.Manjoo: Many observers have pointed out that “Game of Thrones” offers a perfect metaphor for understanding climate change. What do you think of this interpretation?Martin: It’s kind of ironic because I started writing “Game of Thrones” all the way back in 1991, long before anybody was talking about climate change. But there is — in a very broad sense — there’s a certain parallel there. And the people in Westeros are fighting their individual battles over power and status and wealth. And those are so distracting them that they’re ignoring the threat of “winter is coming,” which has the potential to destroy all of them and to destroy their world. And there is a great parallel there to, I think, what I see this planet doing here, where we’re fighting our own battles. We’re fighting over issues, important issues, mind you — foreign policy, domestic policy, civil rights, social responsibility, social justice. All of these things are important. But while we’re tearing ourselves apart over this and expending so much energy, there exists this threat of climate change, which, to my mind, is conclusively proved by most of the data and 99.9 percent of the scientific community. And it really has the potential to destroy our world. And we’re ignoring that while we worry about the next election and issues that people are concerned about, like jobs. Jobs are a very important issue, of course. All of these things are important issues. But none of them are important if, like, we’re dead and our cities are under the ocean. So really, climate change should be the number one priority for any politician who is capable of looking past the next election. But unfortunately, there are only a handful of those. We spend 10 times as much energy and thought and debate in the media discussing whether or not N.F.L. players should stand for the national anthem than this threat that’s going to destroy our world.Galinsky: If you could pick the best real-world, present-day match — politicians, celebrities — for all the major characters in the show, who would you pick?Martin: Pass.Galinsky: What could our present day political leaders learn from Westeros?Martin: I think there are a lot of — a lot of things going on in the world of Seven Kingdoms and Westeros that could be lessons to any ruler, past or present. Certainly at one point, the very simple statement is made that the king is about justice, or what is a king for? We don’t have kings. We have presidents and congressmen and all that. But it’s still what it’s about. It’s about serving the people and leaving the country in better shape when you leave office than it was when you took office. That should be the overriding principle of anyone who decides to run for office or do any sort of public service. Are you making things better? You’re there to serve the people, not to serve yourself, not to serve your contributors.Hulse: When you started creating this weird and bloody and twisted world, did you ever conceive that it would become so popular?Martin: No. Of course, I hoped it would be popular. I mean, you write a book or a series of books, and you hope that people will read them and enjoy them and that enough people will buy them so that you can continue to pay your mortgage and write other books. So you’re always hoping for a level of popularity. And I’ve been very fortunate in that regard. My career’s had ups and downs since I sold my first story in 1971. But there have been more ups than downs, and I’ve won awards, and I’ve had books that sold well. But nothing compared to how these books have sold. And it was already pretty heady and probably beyond any of my anticipations even before the TV show. And then when the TV show came, in the language of “Spinal Tap,” it got turned up to 11. And it’s been a pretty wild ride since. No, I did not anticipate it. No one can anticipate it. Even a successful TV show will get you a lot of popularity, of course. But “Game of Thrones” hasn’t just been a successful TV show. It’s been the most successful TV show in the world. And there’s no way anyone could possibly anticipate it, and certainly I did not, no. But it’s been fun.Davenport: What are your own favorite books and TV shows?Martin: Oh, God, there are so many, past, present and future. Favorite books — of course, “Lord of the Rings,” the science fiction fantasy of Jack Vance, one of my favorite authors, Robert A. Heinlein, whose works I grew up on, cut my teeth on, many other great science fiction and fantasy writers. Roger Zelazny, who was a mentor of mine who lived in Santa Fe, his masterpiece “Lord of Light,” many of his other great books, the Amber series, “Creatures of Light and Darkness” — marvelous, marvelous books. But I read a lot of other things, too, beyond science fiction. I mean, I love the work of Bernard Cornwell, who is doing historical fiction. Of course, I love “The Great Gatsby.” I love many mystery novels and thrillers. I’m presently reading and enjoying a lot of the Jack Reacher books of Lee Child, which I just encountered recently. I’ve been a big Stephen King fan for, you know, half a century, one of the great writers of our times. So you know — so many books, so little time. As for television, I was the first television generation. So I grew up on television, and I still watch it. We’re living in the golden age of television. There’s an amazing amount of terrific shows that are on right now, some which “Game of Thrones” is competing for in the Emmys, shows like “Better Call Saul,” and before it, “Breaking Bad,” filmed here in Albuquerque. HBO does incredible shows — “The Sopranos,” “Rome,” “The Deuce.” I love all of those, love some comedies. “Big Bang Theory,” I think is my favorite current comedy. There’s really more good TV shows than you can watch. And half the time I’m discovering them, they’ve already been canceled because we’re going through them so quickly. But for anyone who loves television, this is a great age.Davenport: Do you consider yourself a history buff?Martin: I do consider myself a history buff, particularly ancient and medieval history.Davenport: Did any specific historical figures and events inspire the characters and story of “Game of Thrones?”Martin: Yes, the English Wars of the Roses, the wars between the Yorks and the Lancasters. But even beyond the Wars of the Roses, which is a pretty obvious inspiration, I’ve read a lot about the Hundred Years’ War, the Crusades, the Albigensian Crusade. Medieval history is just a fascinating period, especially — I mean, I know most about English and French medieval history. I am interested in learning more about Spanish medieval history, German medieval history, Scandinavian medieval history, Russian, all of that. But unfortunately, there’s not as many sources in English as there are for the English and French medieval history. I also love ancient history — the Greeks, the Romans, Alexander the Great and his successors — fascinating stuff all.Wilkinson: Where do you get your hats?Martin: Many places. Many places. Mostly I’m known for wearing these kind of Greek sailor caps. But I actually have a lot of hats. Some, like the Stetsons and the fedoras and the cowboy hats, don’t travel so well with the big brims. So I only wear those around town.Wilkinson: Do you do anything to groom your beard?Martin: I have it trimmed and shaped every few weeks. It grows faster than the hair on my head. So I could look like an Old Testament prophet, if I didn’t watch it pretty carefully.Franco: What other works of yours would you like to see adapted?Martin: Well, we’re presently working on some “Wild Cards” television shows based on the “Wild Cards” series that I’ve been editing for the last 30 years. And that, I hope, will be coming to television in the next year or two. I have like a hundred short stories and five or six other novels out there. Some of them would make good television or film. Some would not. I think the one I’d most like to see would be my historical horror novel, “Fevre Dream,” that came out, a vampire novel set on the Mississippi River in the antebellum period. That was probably my best known book before “Game of Thrones.” And I think it’s one of my best. I’d love to see that one made.Wells: The Sad Puppies campaign failed to materialize for the 2017 Hugo Awards, and the Rabid Puppies campaign didn’t find very solid footing. Are the Hugo Awards unbroken now, or are sci-fi and fantasy in ideological trouble?Martin: Well, I think science fiction and fantasy are having ideological difficulties. But they’re not unique in that. It’s just that they’re not an exception. It’s the entire society that is having these troubles. We are such a deeply divided culture these days, such a deeply divided country. It’s not just S.F. and fantasy. You’re seeing it in gaming with Gamergate. You’re seeing it in comic books with what they’re calling Comicgate. You’re seeing it in young adult fiction with ridiculous internet purge campaigns. It’s coming from the extreme right. And it’s coming from the extreme left as well. And it is very dispiriting. But yes, it has invaded science fiction and fantasy in a big way. Fortunately, the traditional science fiction fans were able to push back against the various Puppy campaigns and win that fight, I think. But it took a toll — the Hugos are wounded. And more, the collegial atmosphere that united science fiction for most of my lifetime is changed. I mean, I remember days when you would have an extremely progressive left-wing author like Norman Spinrad or Harlan Ellison doing a panel with a conservative author like Jerry Pournelle. And they would go hammer and tongs at each other on a panel, arguing the ideas. And then they would adjourn to the bar and drink together and sing old songs for a few hours. That doesn’t seem to exist anymore, the idea of science fiction or fantasy as something that could unite people from all over the political spectrum. It’s a different age. I’m sometimes reminded of Yeats’s “Second Coming”: “Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; / … / The best lack all conviction, and the worst are full of passion and intensity.”Sidell: If you could go back and not kill off one character, who would it be and why?Martin: Pass.Lanis: Where would you live in Westeros or Essos?Martin: Oh, I would probably — the free city of Braavos in Essos would be a cool place to live.Lanis: What plot choice do you most regret?Martin: Eh, pass.Gendler: In “A Song of Ice and Fire,” we’re introduced to many god systems in which the dichotomy is aligned with the fight between the others and the living. However, we seem to —Martin: I’ll pass.Holmes: Will the audience learn more about Joanna Lannister’s back story, specifically her relationship with Tywin and her children?Martin: Have to keep reading the books to find out.Holmes: Did she live long enough to meet Tyrion, and did she love him, or was she repulsed?Martin: Read the books.Advertisement