https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/17/us/politics/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-stamina.html
Donald Trump’s Latest Jab at Hillary Clinton: ‘No Stamina’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2815
AdvertisementSupported byBy Alan RappeportFirst there was “low energy.” Now increasingly it’s “no stamina.”Donald J. Trump dispatched his Republican primary opponents with the power of branding, most notably billing Jeb Bush as a weak-wattage candidate who lacked the pizazz to be president. As Mr. Trump faces an uphill battle in the general election campaign against Hillary Clinton, the Republican presidential nominee is trying to reprise the winning formula that got him this far, slipping it into rallies and speeches that his opponent appears too tired to lead the country.In a prominent national security address on Monday, Mr. Trump could not have been more explicit when he said that Mrs. Clinton “lacks the mental and physical stamina to take on ISIS, and all the many adversaries we face.”The remark drew chortles on social media, with some pointing out that the commander in chief is not needed on the front lines against the Islamic State these days and others recalling that Mr. Trump received a draft deferment during the Vietnam War because of bone spurs in his feet. Women on Twitter said the comment reeked of sexism. The former tennis star Martina Navratilova wondered if Mr. Trump was giving himself too much credit.Trump Questions Clinton's 'Mental And Physical Stamina'- anybody wants to see DT in a t- shirt and shorts?:) https://t.co/D6HItLwVabBut Mr. Trump, who has also given Mrs. Clinton the moniker “Crooked Hillary,” has clearly settled on the line of attack as one that will stick and sting.At a rally in Florida last week, Mr. Trump criticized Mrs. Clinton for giving short speeches and not campaigning with sufficient vigor.“She makes the speech, she turns off the teleprompter,” Mr. Trump said. “Look, what happens, she gives a short speech then she goes home, goes to sleep, she shows up two days later.”Referring to Mrs. Clinton’s remark that she may have “short-circuited” when discussing her private email server, he added: “Remember, short circuit. Remember that, right? Short circuit.”However, tarring Mrs. Clinton as tired is not entirely new for Mr. Trump.During a speech in June, Mr. Trump tried to explain the death of Ambassador Chris Stevens in the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, Libya, as a result of Mrs. Clinton’s fatigue.“He was left helpless to die as Hillary Clinton soundly slept in her bed,” Mr. Trump said. “That’s right. When the phone rang, as per the commercial, at 3 in the morning, Hillary Clinton was sleeping.”And Mr. Trump tested a similar line late last year in Iowa when he suggested that Mrs. Clinton was spending too little time in the state.“You don’t see her for five or six days,” said Mr. Trump, who frequently flies home to his Manhattan penthouse after most days on the campaign trail. “She goes home, goes to sleep.”The questioning of Mrs. Clinton’s energy levels comes as some of her conservative critics have been trying to push the narrative that she is battling an undisclosed illness that makes her unfit for the presidency. Last week, the Fox News host Sean Hannity devoted considerable time on Mrs. Clinton’s rumored medical problems. The right-wing Drudge Report has also prominently displayed images of Mrs. Clinton appearing to stumble and looking unwell.Kathleen Hall Jamieson, a communications professor at the University of Pennsylvania, said that Mr. Trump appeared to be nodding to age and sex stereotypes of women being too frail to handle strenuous activities.“He is playing into that loop of clips that Sean Hannity is playing,” Ms. Jamieson said. “What does it mean that she’s not up to it? It could be ‘she’s a woman and you know what happens when a woman gets older.’”Mrs. Clinton has generally laughed off questions about her fitness, often reminding skeptics that she logged nearly a million miles as secretary of state.Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.Advertisement