http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/nyregion/reaching-a-transit-deal-if-not-compromise-in-a-feud.html
Reaching a Transit Deal, if Not a Compromise in a Feud - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1075
AdvertisementSupported byPolitical MemoBy Michael M. GrynbaumOne is a gearhead whose ideal weekend includes tinkering with a muscle car. The other once refused a police security detail, intent on remaining  behind the wheel of his Ford hybrid.But in recent weeks, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo (the amateur mechanic) and Mayor Bill de Blasio (the determined driver) have discovered a newfound zeal for mass transit, dueling over which man would emerge a more vociferous champion of the people’s mode of transport.Unlikely as such a fight may have seemed, it was hardly surprising given the very public acrimony between these leaders on subjects ranging from public health to public nudity in Times Square.On Saturday, both men declared victory after reaching a deal to pay for improving the region’s transit system. But the compromise may do little to end their feud.After Mr. Cuomo accused the mayor of shortchanging commuters, Mr. de Blasio, a fellow Democrat, agreed to nearly quadruple New York City’s contribution to the five-year, $29 billion capital plan of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the subways, buses and commuter trains used by millions of New Yorkers and millions of visitors to the region.In return, the governor pledged that the city’s $2.5 billion — up from $657 million and spread over the five years of the plan — would be used exclusively for transit, after Mr. de Blasio pointed out that Mr. Cuomo had redirected such funds in the past. The mayor also received a promise that the city would help determine how the money would be spent in the five boroughs.“I give them both credit for putting their money where their mouth is,” said Gene Russianoff, staff lawyer at the rider advocacy group Straphangers Campaign, calling the capital plan among the most ambitious infrastructure plans he had seen in years.Politically speaking, however, Mr. Cuomo delivered a potent line of attack. By suggesting that a mayor singularly focused on combating inequality was unwilling to pay for transit, a classic egalitarian cause, the governor made it more difficult for Mr. de Blasio to resist offering more.“People living in New York City do not blame the governor for things that happen to the subways,” said Kenneth Sherrill, a longtime professor of political science at Hunter College. “The blame falls on the mayor much more than the governor, even though the governor has the bulk of the power.”Mr. de Blasio’s counterargument, that he could not be assured Mr. Cuomo would spend the city’s money wisely, was based on history: The governor has shuffled around transit funds in the state budget for several years in a row.But even some aides in City Hall admitted that the arcana of transit funding had made it difficult for their position to resonate with the broader public.The mayor’s team said it had extracted an unprecedented promise from Mr. Cuomo to end the practice of reshuffling funds. Transit advocates and some politicians, like the Brooklyn borough president, Eric L. Adams, a Democrat, praised that aspect of the deal, even as some remained wary that the arrangement might not be bulletproof.Mr. Cuomo likes to plays hardball, and he benefited from some unusually sharp advocacy from the transportation authority itself.Mr. de Blasio’s team was taken aback when the authority’s chairman, Thomas F. Prendergast, a career transportation professional who was nominated for his post by Mr. Cuomo, abruptly threatened to cut funding for city projects if City Hall did not raise its contribution. The authority’s spokesman, Adam Lisberg, also clashed on social media with some of the mayor’s aides.The authority is controlled by a board with state, county and city representatives. Its top officials do not typically criticize a sitting mayor’s administration.In the end, Mr. de Blasio can now say he committed the city to its largest-ever capital contribution to fixing the mass transit system, a fertile talking point. Mr. Cuomo can point to “a historic investment” in regional transit, as he did in a statement over the weekend that did not mention the mayor by name.It remains an open question whether the transit world will embrace Mr. Cuomo as a subway savior: The governor rarely rides the system and has shown little enthusiasm for a plan to create a long-term revenue source for transit by tolling cars traveling over the East River bridges, which have been free for decades.The mayor, who voted against a similar idea — congestion pricing — during his time in the City Council, has not endorsed that plan, either.Advertisement