https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/27/opinion/missouri-republicans-gerrymandering.html
Opinion | An Insult to Missouri - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2971
AdvertisementSupported byPoliticians try to undermine a constitutional amendment passed in a landslide this month. By David LeonhardtOpinion ColumnistThis article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive the newsletter each weekday.The voters of Missouri this month overwhelmingly passed a constitutional amendment with the aim of making their state government work in less partisan, less corrupt ways.The amendment bars lawmakers from accepting lobbyists’ gifts worth more than $5. It also bars former state officials from accepting a paid lobbying job for two years after leaving office. And it changes the process for drawing state-legislature districts to be fairer for both parties.Some 62 percent of Missourians voted for the amendment, known as Clean Missouri. And yet, in the three weeks since Election Day, top Republicans in Missouri have started a cynical effort to weaken the new law.[Listen to “The Argument” podcast every Thursday morning, with Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David Leonhardt.]The day after the election, the Republican speaker of the Missouri House, Elijah Haahr, said that he wanted “to strike up conversations with African-American lawmakers who have expressed misgivings that Clean Missouri could reduce the [number] of black lawmakers,” Jason Rosenbaum of St. Louis Public Radio reported. That’s a classic strategy for Republican gerrymandering: Effectively guarantee black-held seats in exchange for reducing the overall number of Democratic seats.Last week, opponents of the amendment created a political group to undermine it, Tony Messenger, a metro columnist for The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, has noted. The group has the Alice-in-Wonderland name of “Fair Missouri” and $150,000 in initial funding. Its goal is to place a new measure on the ballot that would sabotage parts of the amendment before they can take effect.“This is about preserving the power to gerrymander legislative districts,” Messenger wrote. It is, he added, an “absurd insult to Missouri voters.”It also fits two larger — and disturbing — patterns. One, local legislators of both parties have recently shown a willingness to undercut citizen-passed initiatives, Sarah Holder of CityLab has noted. The city council in Washington is a good example: Dominated by Democrats, it overturned a wage increase for restaurant workers a mere four months after voters approved it. That move was also — to use Messenger’s phrase — an absurd insult to voters.The second pattern is the Republican Party’s newfound disdain for democracy. Republican leaders across the country have tried to make voting more difficult; to keep some Americans from voting; to interrupt vote counts before they are complete; to gerrymander in the extreme; and now, in Missouri, to repudiate a constitutional amendment approved by 62 percent of the state’s voters. Whistling past the climate crisis. In The Washington Post, Max Boot, a former climate-change skeptic, issues a mea culpa. “I’ve owned up to the danger. Why haven’t other conservatives?” he asks. His answer is that Republicans remain beholden to both ideology and to industries whose profit lies in ignoring the problem. “It is a tragedy for the entire planet that America’s governing party is impervious to science and reason.”In The Times, Paul Krugman focuses on the financial incentives of the anti-science crowd: “Money is still the main answer: Almost all prominent climate deniers are on the fossil-fuel take.”You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).David Leonhardt is a former Washington bureau chief for the Times, and was the founding editor of The Upshot and head of The 2020 Project, on the future of the Times newsroom. He won the 2011 Pulitzer Prize for commentary, for columns on the financial crisis.  @DLeonhardt • Facebook Advertisement