https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/25/arts/design/frick-collection-moroni-exhibition.html
Unheralded Renaissance Painter to Have Major Exhibition at the Frick - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1666
AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter LibbeyThe history of art is littered with significant painters and sculptors who never reached the same level of renown as some their peers. Sometimes these omissions are justified by a disparity in skill, but in certain cases bad luck, prejudice or misunderstanding prevented artists from getting recognition.From Feb. 21, 2019, to June 2, 2019, the Frick Collection’s exhibition “Moroni: The Riches of Renaissance Portraiture” will allow New Yorkers to decide whether Giovanni Battista Moroni deserves to be spoken of in the same breath as the more famous figures of his era.This will be the first major exhibition of Moroni’s work in the United States. (The Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, put on a small exhibition of Moroni’s portraits in 2000.)“It’s not every day you can introduce to the public an Italian Renaissance artist that they don’t know whose work is spectacular,” Aimee Ng, the curator of the exhibition, said in an interview.Ms. Ng explained that Moroni’s portraits are notable because they break from the style of the times and anticipate later, much-lauded developments in painting.“If you look at the history of Italian Renaissance portraiture, in the 15th century they’re very staid, profiled portraits,” she said. “You really don’t get narrative portraiture until Rembrandt in the 17th century, when you have a portrait of a shipbuilder passing notes to the wife that he is being painted with, as an action, showing what he does for a living.”But Moroni, who worked in Northern Italy in the 16th century, was painting narrative portraits before Rembrandt was born. In “The Tailor,” circa 1570, Moroni depicts a man pausing before cutting a piece of fabric.Ms. Ng emphasized the naturalism of Moroni’s work, which has a mixed reputation among art historians. “The thing he was most famous for and most celebrated for was also why people criticized him,” she said. “He was able to produce this effect of having captured exactly the person as they sat in front of him.”The 14 objects that will be shown alongside the exhibition’s 22 paintings are intended to combat the notion that Moroni was simply a copyist.In Moroni’s painting “Isotta Brembati,” the pattern of the sitter’s dress expands in scale from the bodice to the skirt. This, Ms. Ng said, would have been nearly impossible given the technical limitations of looms in Renaissance Italy. But it is only by comparing real examples of textiles from that period that you are able to appreciate Moroni’s inventiveness.When asked why Moroni was able to break with some of the trends of Renaissance painting, Ms. Ng pointed out that he worked outside Italy’s major artistic centers and that he frequently painted people of modest social status. Moroni, then, was something of an outlier in his own time. But with a major exhibition at the Frick, perhaps his role in Renaissance painting will be reconsidered.Advertisement