https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/01/smarter-living/get-your-resolution-back-on-track.html
You’ve Probably Given Up on Your Resolution. Let’s Get Back on Track. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1502
AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim HerreraWelcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. The editor, Tim Herrera, emails readers with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.Let’s talk about Feb. 14.Yes, it’s Valentine’s Day, but more important than that: It’s the day by which 80 percent of people who made a New Year’s resolution will have given up.But this year, let’s stick it out together and keep each other accountable.Every Monday in this newsletter during February, Smarter Living is going to offer you tips, tricks and advice for sticking to your resolutions — or revamping them entirely into something you truly want to do. Longtime SL readers might remember this from last year, when more than 3,000 readers joined us for the month by sharing their resolutions and sending in progress updates and new strategies throughout the month.To start, let’s go back to basics: Did you even pick the right resolution? As Jen A. Miller writes in our guide to setting and keeping resolutions, you want to pick something that your heart is in, rather than something you set arbitrarily or when emotions are high.“If you do it out of the sense of self-hate or remorse or a strong passion in that moment, it doesn’t usually last long,” psychiatrist Dr. Michael Bennett told Jen. “But if you build up a process where you’re thinking harder about what’s good for you, you’re changing the structure of your life, you’re bringing people into your life who will reinforce that resolution, then I think you have a fighting chance.”So this week, let’s all just evaluate whether we even care about our resolutions, then think about what we really want to do. (And if you got it right the first time, kudos!) Once we’ve landed on the perfect goal, keep in mind you want to be SMART about it:Specific: Set concrete, clearly defined goals with specific points of success.Measurable: Whatever the goal is, find ways to measure progress.Achievable: Aim high, but within reason. Your goal should be a stretch, but something you could actually achieve.Relevant: Find a goal that matters enough to you that you’ll be motivated to stick with it.Time-bound: Set a reasonable timeline for your goal, and focus on the small wins along the way.Once you’ve set your goal, email it to me at tim@nytimes.com with the subject line “2018 resolutions,” and fill in your answers to following questions. I’ll start:Your name: I’m Tim Herrera, your Smarter Living editor.Your resolution and why you chose it: My main resolution this year is more of a goal: I want to run the Brooklyn Half-Marathon in 90 minutes or less. It’s a stretch goal, but one within reach.Two specific sub-goals within your resolution: 1. My training starts in earnest today, and I’m committed to running at least three days a week all month. 2. I will cross-train at least one day per week.Next week I’ll highlight some of my favorite responses, along with some helpful tips and advice.Have a great week, and best of luck!—TimHow to Make (and Keep) a New Year’s Resolution Here’s how to identify the right resolution to improve your life, create a plan on how to reach it, and become part of the small group of people who successfully make a resolution.The Six Stages of Making Setbacks Work in Your Favor People experience six distinct stages of turning adversity into growth. These stages apply to organizations, families, communities and individuals.The 7-Day Financial Tuneup: Time to Tidy Your Finances This weeklong program from The New York Times will walk you through some of the simplest financial tasks you can do to tidy your finances, optimize your spending and make sure you are planning appropriately for the long-term.Meet the New Travel Agents (a.k.a. Travel Networks) How do these networks stack up against each other, and what does it cost to take advantage of their perks?Making Age Spots a Thing of the Past The Food and Drug Administration has approved a first-of-its-kind treatment to rid patients of these unsightly lesions.How Do I Avoid Catching Cold or Flu From My Sick Partner? It’s harder to protect yourself when the sick person is living inside your house. But certain measures may help.This week I’ve invited one of my favorite writers, James Clear, to share some recent stories he loved. James writes a fantastic weekly newsletter about building better habits, and I highly recommend you subscribe.The Building Blocks of Personhood: Oliver Sacks on Narrative as the Pillar of Identity The physician Oliver Sacks shares beautiful insights on how your identity is shaped by the inner story you tell yourself.What Did You Learn This Year Twelve women shares lessons, big and small, on what they learned over the past year.Rest and Recovery: A Whole New Perspective Rest and recovery actually require energy from your body — just like working out — and we should allocate more time to it.Getting Rich vs. Staying Rich Fortunes were won and lost around the Great Depression, and the lessons in these stories remain powerful today: Becoming rich is hard, but staying rich might be harder.Advertisement