https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/10/arts/design/derrick-adams-live-and-in-color.html
Derrick Adams: ‘Live and in Color’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1174
AdvertisementSupported byArt in ReviewBy Roberta SmithSince first appearing on the scene over a decade ago, Derrick Adams has been multidisciplinary with a vengeance. Working in performance art, painting, sculpture and music, he has sardonically explored the intersections of popular culture, fashion, black experience and the art of the past. His general approach is to layer and hybridize, so it’s not surprising that about three years ago, he added collage to his repertory. His latest efforts in this medium are big, booming and seductive, but sharp-edged.Titling his show “Live and in Color,” Mr. Adams adapts for his own purposes the exaggerated broadcast introductions of early television announcers, conjuring a period when so much about the medium was false and exaggerated — black stereotypes included, or maybe especially.The larger-than-life figures in these collages summon sitcom characters, newscasters, entertainers, product marketers and game show hosts. Smiling or laughing, all are depicted with deft combinations of boldly colored or patterned fabrics or paper. They radiate the artificial palette of early color TV. The framework surrounding each figure mimics a vintage monitor with fake wood grain and enormous dials. (Remember those?)These works come on strong and simply, but are actually quite complex. Visually, they build astutely on precedents like Cubism, Matisse cutouts, Pop Art and the blocky figures of both William H. Johnson and Romare Bearden. Guns and violence put in appearances, as do subtexts and double meanings: The repetition of the word special in a collage titled “They All Want Cupcakes” suggests both marked-down prices and the often isolating burden of being a black success in a white world. And don’t overlook Mr. Adams’s use of color and scale to ramp up the unalloyed cheer that so often still seems expected of television performers, regardless of race.DERRICK ADAMS ‘Live and in Color’ Tilton Gallery 8 East 76th Street, Manhattan Through Oct. 18 Advertisement