https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/25/magazine/letter-of-recommendation-terrace-house.html
Letter of Recommendation: ‘Terrace House’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1208
AdvertisementSupported byLetter of RecommendationBy Andrew RidkerI came to reality television late, and I watched as if I were making up for lost time. I started with the “Bachelor” franchise, bingeing on old seasons when I couldn’t wait for the next one to start. Soon I moved on to “Love & Hip Hop,” then “Dating Naked” (gone but not forgotten). I took a perverse sort of pleasure in my new habit, but it wasn’t until I found “Terrace House,” a staggeringly banal Japanese franchise, that I realized the format was capable of genuine literary excellence.The premise is familiar: Six young people live together and consent to being filmed around the clock. (The original house had a terrace, hence the name.) But that’s where the similarities to shows like “Real World” and “Big Brother” end. On “Terrace House,” the roommates conduct themselves with what I can only describe as radical civility. They’re polite — almost exceedingly so. It’s the kind of decency you rarely see on American TV — scripted or not — nor on the notoriously cruel game shows Japan is known for. Participants do, in fact, come to “Terrace House” to make friends.The show’s most recent seasons were set in Hawaii, and they are now available on Netflix. There are still no cash prizes. Nothing, beyond the demands of daily life, is at stake. In one episode, a college athlete struggles to stop eating junk food and stay committed to his dream of going pro. Another episode revolves around a trip to Costco. Simply put, “Terrace House” is boring. Extremely, hypnotically boring. But after a few episodes — and it does take a few — something strange happened to me. I capitulated. I gave in to the show’s logic. I stopped expecting shocking twists, or revelations, or other rewards for my attention. I started living on “Terrace House” time. I watched 46 episodes in under a month.Without narrative contrivances, I found myself identifying with the housemates in a powerful way. Their lives are just so real. They have crushes. They hunt for retail jobs that don’t always work out. The action actually feels so unscripted, so unedited that it’s almost Proustian, capturing real life in all its small complexities. Artfully framed shots of food and landscapes are spliced into unhurried pans that give the impression that the house itself is watching its inhabitants, with restrained interest. “Terrace House” isn’t the first mundane show on TV, but it’s most likely the first to be mundane on purpose.But even the most humdrum reality show must intersect, somehow, with the celebrity-industrial complex. So, at discrete intervals, “Terrace House” cuts to a panel of Japanese stars who watch the show from a remote location and provide commentary. Like Greek gods, they observe and remark on the mortals from the beige couch that is their Mount Olympus. This clever inversion of gaze suggests to the viewer that these young people’s lives are worthy of examination, however pedestrian they might be.Take, for example, the situation that unfolded when Yusuke, an endearingly awkward ukulele prodigy, asked out Lauren, an aspiring artist and a model. Yusuke is cripplingly shy, humble to a fault, and completely inexperienced when it comes to the opposite sex. Lauren is beautiful, confident and mature for her 18 years. When he finally works up the courage to ask her out, she hesitantly accepts. There are no confessional interviews on “Terrace House,” but it’s clear from their exchange that she isn’t into Yusuke — only too kind to turn him down.You watch in real time as Yusuke gets a haircut, barely containing his excitement when he tells the barber that he’s going on his very first date. He buys new boots and two different colored shirts, because in the store he “got confused and couldn’t decide.” All dressed up and wearing a bit too much product in his hair, Yusuke meets Lauren at the movies (“Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them”). On any other reality show their strained conversation in line to buy tickets would have been left on the cutting-room floor. But “Terrace House” lets it play out in its excruciating entirety:YUSUKE: This isn’t a sequel or anything, right? It’s a new work?LAUREN: Yeah.YUSUKE: But it’s the same ——LAUREN: It’s a new work by J.K. Rowling.YUSUKE: So it’s by the same author as Harry Potter?LAUREN: It’s not Harry Potter, but it’s the same author. The feel will probably be similar.YUSUKE: Oh, the same author. I’m looking forward to it.LAUREN: I’m also looking forward to it.YUSUKE: It’ll be good, I’m sure.In any other context, this would be unwatchable. But I’d completely succumbed to the trancelike effect of the show, which does so little to insert melodrama and tension where it doesn’t exist that it works on your consciousness like a sensory-deprivation chamber. In this state, even a hint of rejection can be hugely affecting — just like in real life.After the movie, Yusuke invites Lauren to dinner. She demurs, citing a family commitment. And the date ends — almost. Yusuke, rather than return home defeated, stoically honors his reservation at an otherwise empty restaurant and eats a catfish dinner alone. Sitting on my own beige sofa, four hours already vanished into his world, I wept.Andrew Ridker is the editor of “Privacy Policy: The Anthology of Surveillance Poetics.” His debut novel is forthcoming from Viking.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement