https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/22/opinion/laver-cup-federer-djokovic-tennis.html
Opinion | Why Does the Tennis Season End Before It’s Over?  - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2140
AdvertisementSupported bySportingIn October and November, the sport exists (Laver Cup!) and doesn’t exist simultaneously. I’m both fascinated and irritated by this.By Rowan Ricardo PhillipsMr. Phillips is the writer of the forthcoming “The Circuit: A Tennis Odyssey.”I love tennis. I play it (too much, maybe), and I’m a big fan of the game. That said, considering myself a fan of the game increasingly feels strange to me. I can’t quite put my finger on why. It’s not because I’m falling out of love with the sport. It’s that the big picture is completely out of focus. I know what a tennis match is. But what is it that we’re talking about when we talk about the game of tennis? This weekend’s Laver Cup — a men’s tournament being held in Chicago that features top players from around the world, including Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic — has got me wondering.I’m not referring to a game of tennis (15-love, 15-all, etc.), I’m referring to the game of tennis. When we say “the game of” — the game of basketball or baseball, for example — we’re talking about the idea of the game. We know its structures: its rules, its contexts and, quite crucially, what a season is. In other words, we know why the players are playing. In tennis, the United States Open is a type of unofficial end of the season for casual viewers. It takes place at the end of summer, the final of the four annual Grand Slam tournaments. It’s also the final time in the year that tennis forces its way into the public sphere — this year it was Serena Williams and the women’s final. But after the Open, there are still two months of tennis on the calendar. Do you care who will end the season with the No. 1 ranking? Will you keep up with October and November matches in Beijing, Tokyo and Shanghai? Is the cold autumn brutalism of the European indoor season what you endured the warm and golden days of summer for?These aren’t intended to be rhetorical questions. No doubt some of you will say yes to all of that (or, as in my case: no, yes, yes). However, I also suspect that some of you will hardly have any idea what I’m even talking about. You bailed after the Open, and hey, I can’t blame you. The game of tennis promotes itself around the four majors. They are the four big events in the story of the year: Who will win the Grand Slam tournaments and what obstacles will be overcome on that journey? Stay tuned. At the Open, Naomi Osaka defeated her idol, Williams, playing off-the-charts tennis, won $3.8 million, and is now known worldwide. For 2018 that’s the end of the story. How will Williams respond on the court to the controversy surrounding her defeat? Tune in next year to know. Novak Djokovic is back and suddenly dominating again. How will Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, the only two players in front of him in the rankings and career major titles, handle this? I’ve been asked about this ad nauseam, but as it relates not to the Shanghai Masters tournament or the Rolex Paris Masters next month but to the 2019 Australian Open and beyond. As it stands, tennis in October and November exists and doesn’t exist simultaneously. I’m both fascinated and annoyed by all of this.The Laver Cup is a three-day team-tennis tournament dreamed up by Federer (and his management team) and named after his tennis idol, the Australian great Rod Laver. Last year’s inaugural edition dangled the rare carrot before the public of seeing Federer and his great rival Nadal share the court as teammates. By all measures it was a rousing success. But will that success be permanent or, as Sade sang it, are things never as good as the first time?We’ll know a bit after this year’s version: with Nadal absent from Team Europe and Team Rest of the World once again lacking in genuine star power, the Laver Cup faces an existential question: What exactly is it, and what will it become? A genuine, competitive fixture on the annual schedule, as Federer insists it already is? Or, in a sport with a schedule already bursting at the seams and its players overextended, is it best served as an exhibition at the back end of a grueling calendar to celebrate the game?What’s clear is that the Laver Cup has pounced on an opportunity in a fallow part of the tennis schedule. Those days just after the United States Open are an exit door for many casual viewers. The Laver Cup is has offered itself as a stay against the exodus, banking on Federer’s presence and the novelty of rivals becoming teammates for a few days. Just a year ago, the tournament had the post-Open stage to itself. But other investors have gotten wise to the act. The Davis Cup, an international team-tennis tournament founded in 1900, plans to change its format in 2019 amid controversy. The Cup used to take place throughout the year. In 2019, the 18-nation final of the competition will be played in one week in November. And now, announced just days ago, you can add to this weekend the proposed Majesty Cup, a 64-player winner-take-all roughly $10 million exhibition tournament. Both the revamped Davis Cup and the hilariously tone-deaf “Hunger Games”-meets-Belle- Époque Majesty Cup are the brainstorm of the soccer player Gerard Piqué’s investment group Kosmos. Yes, I’m as lost as you. And so, come September 2019, the three-year old Laver Cup will be the venerable old institution among a gaggle of tennis tournaments that have nothing to do with either one another or the tennis season itself. Another clot on the calendar to try to make sense of or ignore. I guess the idea is that we’ll still be excited to see Roger Federer play doubles with another European player — maybe Andy Murray will be healthy again by then. Or, if not, we’ll switch over to whatever consultancy-speak format Kosmos rolls out for us — I just hope it comes with an instruction manual … and a return slip.Rowan Ricardo Phillips (@RowanRicardo) is the writer of the forthcoming “The Circuit: A Tennis Odyssey.”Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. Advertisement