https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/arts/cannes-film-festival-2017-celebrating-the-old-and-the-new.html
At the Cannes Film Festival, Celebrating the Old and the New - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
719
AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicolas RapoldThe number may not have the official ring of a diamond anniversary, but the Cannes Film Festival presents its 70th edition with a selection worth celebrating. The festival includes a formidable slate of luminaries while embracing new directorial faces, commemorating past selections in Cannes Classics and nodding to changing technologies.The 50-plus premieres in the festival, which runs May 17 to 28, include works by Todd Haynes, Sofia Coppola, Michael Haneke, Noah Baumbach and Arnaud Desplechin, as well as special projects by Agnès Varda, David Lynch and Abbas Kiarostami, who died in July. There’s also plenty of new talent.“Cinema is a way of thinking about the world, of knowing others and of knowing oneself,” Thierry Frémaux, the head of the festival, said in an interview. “In 1946, by creating the Cannes Film Festival, it was thought that cinema and culture were important in the reconstruction of the postwar world. We still think that culture, and therefore cinema, still has a say.”Mr. Frémaux’s strong sense of cinema’s purpose is reflected in the strength of the auteur lineup (as well as the subject matter of several films that touch on topics like immigration). Every edition of Cannes is contingent on which directors have finished films in time for the festival, and Cannes this year benefits from a number of major filmmakers who took their ideas in new directions.Mr. Haynes’s “Wonderstruck,” one of the most anticipated titles, follows the journeys of two deaf children, each in a different time period, 1927 and 1977. It’s adapted by Brian Selznick from his book, and in addition to its young leads, Oakes Fegley and Millicent Simmonds, it stars Julianne Moore and Michelle Williams.“What’s unique about this film, and one of the reasons I wanted to do it, is it’s another thing I’ve never done before, which was make a film I really wanted kids to be able to see,” Mr. Haynes said. He added that in informal preview screenings, children responded well to the film’s stylistic ambition in rendering the deaf experience.Mr. Haynes has plenty of company this year, including Ms. Coppola, who reinterprets “The Beguiled,” a Civil War-era story originally starring Clint Eastwood in 1971, now with Nicole Kidman and Colin Farrell; Bong Joon-ho, imagining a new kind of monster in “Okja”; Yorgos Lanthimos, likely to ruffle feathers with “The Killing of a Sacred Deer,” starring Mr. Farrell and Ms. Kidman; the cleareyed documentary veterans Claude Lanzmann and Raymond Depardon; two films by Hong Sang-soo; and Andrey Zvyagintsev, with the grim-sounding family drama “Loveless.”The stature of the festival is also supported by the presence of Ms. Varda. Her “Visages, Villages” presents the fruits of her cross-country photographic project in France with the artist JR. And the film “Redoubtable,” directed by Michel Hazanavicius (“The Artist”), portrays Ms. Varda’s contemporary, the filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard, played by the French actor Louis Garrel, at a turning point in 1967.“It’s a story of a man who wants to change but doesn’t know how,” Mr. Hazanavicius said. “He really revolutionizes himself.”The festival will also have its first full-fledged virtual reality entry in “Carne y Arena,” about the hardships of crossing the Mexican border with the United States, by the director Alejandro G. Iñárritu.Television, already represented by the major players Netflix and Amazon, is another new wrinkle in this tradition-based festival. David Lynch’s much-anticipated “Twin Peaks” revival will be shown, as will Jane Campion’s and Ariel Kleiman’s “Top of the Lake: China Girl,” with Elisabeth Moss and the ubiquitous Ms. Kidman.Last week, the festival announced a change in its rules in response to a controversy over streaming services and distribution. The new rule states that, starting in 2018, “any film that wishes to compete in Competition at Cannes will have to commit itself to being distributed in French movie theaters.”The festival’s lineup may give the impression that it is solely focused on famous names, but the 2017 edition embraces the opportunity to track filmmakers tackling new challenges: the New York filmmakers Josh a and Benny Safdie, with the Robert Pattinson robbery picture “Good Time”; Jacques Doillon, with his biographical picture “Rodin”; and Robin Campillo, with “120 BPM [Beats Per Minute],” a look at Act Up in the early 1990s. That list also includes filmmakers who stumbled somewhat with recent films, like Fatih Akin and Lynne Ramsay.“The vocation of Cannes, or all major festivals, is twofold: to honor great auteurs and make beautiful discoveries,” Mr. Frémaux said of the mix of filmmakers.The Un Certain Regard section has typically been the platform where such discoveries are made, with selections from around the globe. Mr. Frémaux singled out Algeria (Karim Moussaoui’s “Until the Birds Return”) and Slovakia (Gyorgy Kristof’s “Out”) as two rarely seen countries in the lineup, both with debut films eligible for the Caméra d’Or. Also featured will be the festival veterans Kiyoshi Kurosawa, Mathieu Amalric, Laurent Cantet, Sergio Castellitto, Michel Franco and Valeska Grisebach.The festival is complemented by the vital selections of the Directors’ Fortnight, with additional movies in another parallel program, Critics’ Week. The Fortnight features new films by Claire Denis, Philippe Garrel, Abel Ferrara, Bruno Dumont and Sean Baker. Critics’ Week includes a film by Fellipe Barbosa and a dark comedy-drama by Atsuko Hirayanagi with two executive producers who are not usually mentioned at Cannes: Adam McKay and Will Ferrell.“When I hear all the good things, I start doubting things — it’s too good to be true,” Ms. Hirayanagi said. “I think it’s Japanese of me.”That trepidation is part of Cannes. It happens when the films have their debuts in front of the festival’s audiences, but it precedes the festival, as filmmakers rush to finish their films in time.Ms. Denis’s “Let the Sunshine In” opens Directors’ Fortnight and stars Juliette Binoche, Gérard Depardieu and Alex Descas. The director remembered getting the welcome offer to open the Directors’ Fortnight before the film was actually complete.“The Fortnight offer was sort of waving to us: Let’s meet, let’s be together, let’s come,” Ms. Denis said of the appeal of the deadline. “It was a possibility to experience happy fright.”That could also describe the nervous excitement with which Cannes audiences await each film: hoping for greatness, not quite knowing what’s next.Advertisement