https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/18/opinion/columnists/brett-kavanaugh-supreme-court-term-limits.html
Opinion | The Supreme Court Needs Term Limits - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1058
AdvertisementSupported byThey would make the current system fairer — and tone down the intensity of the confirmation process.By David LeonhardtOpinion ColumnistThis article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive the newsletter each weekday.No other major democracy has lifetime appointments to its highest court. Only the United States does, and it creates all kinds of problems.For one, our system often does not respect the will of the people. Rather than the Supreme Court’s makeup being determined by elections over many years, it’s based on a combination of those elections and the randomness of how long justices live. Jimmy Carter was unable to make a single nomination to the court because no justice died or retired during his four-year presidency. Richard Nixon filled four seats during his five-and-a-half years as president.“The policy future of the country,” Norm Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute has written, “depends as much on the actuarial tables and the luck of the draw for presidents as it does on the larger trends in politics and society.”This unfairness born of randomness isn’t the only problem. Given the deep partisan polarization in America, lifetime appointments have also turned confirmations into epic political battles. That’s why the Brett Kavanaugh process feels so momentous. It’s why the Merrick Garland process — or the lack of one — still enrages so many people.“It makes the stakes too high,” the political scientist Lee Drutman wrote this summer in Vox. “So here’s a simple idea to dial down some of the destructive warfare of the Supreme Court confirmation process: term limits for Supreme Court justices.”Yes, indeed. Term limits for the court are an excellent idea. It would take a constitutional amendment, but that’s O.K. The United States has already amended its Constitution 27 times — or an average of about once every nine years. We are overdue for at least one more amendment.The most appealing idea to me is staggered 18-year terms on the court, with each four-year presidential term automatically bringing two appointments. Such a system would be more consistent with democratic principles. It would have several ancillary benefits, too. Aging justices would no longer hang on to their jobs past the point when they should (which has been a real problem in the past). And as Ornstein notes, highly qualified candidates in their late 50s and early 60s — who are now largely ignored by presidents — would be considered for the court.There would still be some details to work out, such as the transition from the current system to the new one. The new law would also need a mechanism to prevent the opposing party in the Senate from denying a president a justice. But all of that is workable.The current system began, obviously, in the 18th century, when both politics and human lifespans were very different. It’s time for a change.The document release. President Trump took another outrageous step to protect himself yesterday, releasing a set of documents from the Russia investigation that have the potential to compromise American intelligence sources. Both Asha Rangappa, a former F.B.I. agent, and Representative Adam Schiff, explain why the move is damaging.You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).David Leonhardt is a former Washington bureau chief for the Times, and was the founding editor of The Upshot and head of The 2020 Project, on the future of the Times newsroom. He won the 2011 Pulitzer Prize for commentary, for columns on the financial crisis.  @DLeonhardt • Facebook Advertisement