https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/28/magazine/rachel-brosnahans-comic-timing.html
Rachel Brosnahan’s Comic Timing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
311
FeatureHer star turn in ‘The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel’ — the first major comedic role in her career — comes at a moment when it’s crucial to reclaim women’s place in stand-up history.CreditCreditRyan Pfluger for The New York Times. Stylist: Sarah Slutsky.Supported byBy Rachel SymeStop me if you’ve heard it before: the one about the actress who gets the worst flu of her life. She has a fever that makes her feel as if she’s underwater, that slips her into tiny blackouts, that makes her toes sweat. Her brain feels like a fog machine. She can barely remember her own name. Snotty tissues are stuffed down her pants and littering the floor. She is also about to do the most important stand-up comedy act of her career. She has to deliver five minutes of material, midday, to an almost empty room. The stakes are high but simple: Make ’em laugh, and she gets everything. But, and this is important: She is not a comedian. She doesn’t write punch lines. She is really more of a self-professed “dad humor” aficionado — she laughs at farts, at dopey puns in store names. She has never played a club; she has never even played a living room. And there she is, sloshing around in her heels, most likely contagious, telling jokes to four people who could change her fate.There is no punch line here: This really happened. When Rachel Brosnahan, who is 27 and not a comic but now plays one on Amazon Prime, walked into her audition for “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel,” she could barely see straight. She was, as she told me, “probably deathly ill,” but she had no intention of canceling the meeting. For one thing, she had already pushed back her flight once, hoping her illness would abate. Instead, her temperature spiked. The morning of her rescheduled trip, she woke up clammy and disoriented and completely terrified that if she didn’t hurl her body out to Hollywood that day, then Amy Sherman-Palladino and her co-creator (and husband), Daniel Palladino, were going to give the part of Midge Maisel away to the next woman. And she couldn’t let that happen. So, she said, “I flew my ass out to Los Angeles when I probably should not have even been on a plane.”The thing was, she had a feeling in her bones that Midge was her part. In a world of hamburger roles for television ingénues, Midge was a porterhouse. Amy Sherman-Palladino writes her leading ladies — Lorelai of “Gilmore Girls,” Michelle Simms on “Bunheads” — as walking winks, verbose descendants of Dorothy Parker, quipping for their lives. And Brosnahan felt that she could truly inhabit Miriam (Midge) Maisel, a young Jewish housewife in 1958 who has finagled the full megillah straight out of Bryn Mawr — the gleaming Upper West Side apartment, the doting husband who pitches ad copy by day and wears transgressive turtlenecks by night, a toddler and a bouncing baby and a waist that cinches to a Coke-bottle shape in a Perma-lift girdle. (Never mind that Brosnahan is a gentile.)By the end of the first episode, of course, Midge’s idyll crumbles. It has to — no one wants to watch a show about a merry midcentury homemaker with zero problems. First, she finds out that her husband, Joel, who spends his nights workshopping comedy sets at the Greenwich Village club the Gaslight Café, has been stealing his material from Bob Newhart records. Emasculated, Joel continues to dig: He reveals to Midge that he’s sleeping with his svelte secretary, Penny Pann, and worse, that they’re in love, and he’s packing his bags. After he slinks away, Midge downs a bottle of red wine on the subway, marches through the rain to the famed Gaslight club and winds up onstage, soaking and soused in a pink swing coat. What follows is not so much a comedy set as an act of absurdist outsider art; Midge mocks men coming out of the bathroom, skulks around the stage like a Valkyrie and veers between pathos and one-liners so wildly that the crowd isn’t sure whether to laugh or flee. For a grand finale, her top comes off, the cops are called and she’s hauled off to jail screaming about how “there’s no [expletive] way that Penny Pann can compete with these tits!”This meltdown is one of the scenes that Brosnahan had to play during that audition, while she was dizzy and barely lucid. Her illness, it turns out, worked in her favor. She looked slightly damp and deranged the entire time. “I had to take off my shoes at one point because I was sweating so much,” she told me. “It was a mess. And Amy kept stopping me to tell me to powder my face. I think I may have had a small stroke? I literally don’t remember a single moment of it.”Amy Sherman-Palladino later told me over the phone that she has a different memory of Brosnahan’s audition. “She blew in like a hurricane,” she said. “Nothing shook. Her pages didn’t shake, her hands didn’t shake. There was literally no fear.” Daniel Palladino added that, while they knew making actresses perform a stand-up set to a cold room was “sadistic,” they had to find someone who could wisecrack under pressure.Brosnahan has been an actress on the cusp for a decade — always just about to break out, about to be the chosen one. It’s not that she hasn’t been noticed. When she was 21 and about to graduate from N.Y.U., she was cast on Netflix’s first series, “House of Cards,” as Rachel Posner, a high-end escort in Washington who sleeps with a congressman and then is paid off to stay quiet. The role was originally intended for someone older, and Brosnahan was supposed to act in only two episodes. “They told me I was too young and that I should wear a tighter dress because they had to believe I was a lot older than I was,” she told me. “I thought, Oh, God, I definitely didn’t get this, and they are going to figure out I’m a fraud.”Not only did she get it, but her chemistry with Michael Kelly, who played the presidential chief of staff assigned to handle Posner and who falls for her in the process, was so undeniable that the creators wrote her character from a five-line role into eight episodes in the second season, and then one more episode, in the third, that earned her an Emmy nomination. “Michael used to call my agent after we had scenes together and tell him how much he enjoyed working with me,” she told me.We were walking underneath a giant aqueduct. Brosnahan is petite and put together; that afternoon, she was wearing a striped T-shirt with a fitted motorcycle jacket and a demure pair of black penny loafers. She looked like a preppy mime. For our first meeting, she wanted to see the medieval art at the Cloisters, a short trip north of her apartment in Manhattan, but we both agreed that the day was too warm to spend among dusty tapestries. Instead, she wanted to stroll along the Hudson through the wildflowers. “I really credit Michael as being a huge reason I continued on that show,” she said. There was a fierceness to Brosnahan in the role; even though she was young, she played a political Fantine who was already weathered and wry, as disgusted by the grubby hands of lobbyists as their detractors on the Hill.Her character met a brutal end — buried somewhere in the wilderness for knowing too much — but by then Brosnahan already had another TV job. She played Abby Isaacs, the young wife of a physicist in the underrated period drama “Manhattan,” about the creation of the atomic bomb. All red lipstick and pin curls and wifely duties, Abby was a hint at what Brosnahan could do with a part like Midge: another woman who loses her innocence, in this case a newcomer to Los Alamos who must slowly come to understand that her husband might help blow up the world. Lila Byock, one of the show’s writers, told me: “I don’t think Rachel ever gave a bad take. And I’m not being hyperbolic. We would watch takes, and it was like, holy [expletive], who is this person? She was about a year older than the actress who was playing a teenager on our show, but it was almost like she walked in fully formed.”Brosnahan was born in Milwaukee but raised in Highland Park, Ill., outside Chicago. Her father worked in children’s publishing, and her mother, an import from Britain (“she still says ‘sauce’ like sohs”), stayed home to raise Brosnahan and her two siblings. The family hobby was sports. Brosnahan was on the wrestling and lacrosse teams, and she was also a certified snowboarding instructor, which in Chicago is apparently a big deal. She started acting in kindergarten plays and never lost the taste for it but says that her parents were skeptical when she told them that she wanted to pursue it seriously. “They were like, hold the phone,” she said. “My dad said, you know, if you want to do it, then prove it. And I started saving money for acting classes.” She went to N.Y.U. to study drama but started booking roles so quickly — guest spots on “In Treatment,” “The Good Wife” and “CSI: Miami,” roles in indie films — that she had to have “many dinners” with her father just to assure him that she was attending enough classes to be able to graduate.Until Midge, Brosnahan played almost solely dramatic roles. That’s where she feels most comfortable, most in control; as she has discovered, telling jokes involves a level of vulnerability far beyond crying on camera. Luckily, the women whom Sherman-Palladino and Palladino write are all about taut sentences and tight timing; there is nothing elastic about them. Their loose, swingy tempo is entirely preplanned, down to the word (“a monstrous amount of material, and you have to have it down cold,” Brosnahan said). While this rigor may not have worked for a seasoned comedian, someone accustomed to improvisation, Brosnahan took to the constraints right away. She found the bounce inside Midge’s hardness; she snaps the end of her sentences like bubble gum.Sherman-Palladino’s own father, Don Sherman, was a comic right out of the borscht-belt old school. After he died in 2012, she started to think about how she might honor his legacy by telling stories about his world — Lenny Bruce would come by the house when she was a child, and though her family lived in L.A. by then, she grew up hearing war stories about the New York stand-up scene. She began to think about setting something in the world her father rattled around in, the dank Village clubs of the ’60s. But instead of following a grizzled comic through the haze of two-drink minimums and chance encounters with Jack Paar, she decided to showcase a much less examined life: that of a normal woman, alone under the hot lights, slinging zingers for pay.It is this belief in Midge’s normalcy — that she was just like every other wife putting a steak dinner on the table before she was not — that ultimately makes her a radical character for television right now. Her comedy doesn’t come from a deep well of insecurity; it comes from a brazen moxie that she cannot explain and never realized had a viable outlet until she stepped onstage. At this turbulent moment in show business, when many men — especially comics — who were praised and protected as icons are being revealed as harassers, creeps and criminals, what we thought of as a linear narrative of progress is being rewritten. We are seeing how many talented women were forced to diminish themselves or give up in the face of misogyny, particularly in comedy, where being a successful woman is so often tied to making the boys in power laugh.“The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” has a swirling, magical-realism quality to it. It begins with a wedding — Midge and Joel’s — at which, naturally, Midge insists on giving her own toast. She is a woman who has enjoyed every privilege: couture clothes, the full spread at Zabar’s fish counter, a palatial apartment in her parents’ building. One striking scene from the pilot follows Midge as she does her nightly beauty routine, waking up twice in the middle of the night, once to remove her makeup and again to put it back on, so that her husband always wakes up to a perfectly done face. When Joel leaves Midge, the shock is seismic. She has never had to work, or even struggle with her own self-image. This is why her revelations are so primed for comedy: She is a woman who fully believed she deserved the moon, and when her perfect facade disappears, she’s apoplectic and confused and ready to rant.Whenever Midge’s jokes really hit, it is joyful and electric to watch. Women have the right to claim, and reclaim, a place in stand-up comedy history. There were always women working the circuit, even on the borscht belt — like the 1960s club regular Belle Barth, who sold millions of comedy records. “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” provides a vehicle through which to engage and recover their stories all over again. Because Midge doesn’t start out on a crusade, she almost smuggles progress into the world; like many women navigating midcentury lives, her success is mounted like an undercover operation.“What I love about Midge is that she is so not a feminist,” Brosnahan told me. “She’s a creature of her time.” Midge Maisel is doing what she needs to do to get ahead in a man’s world, which is its own kind of quiet, lesser-told revolt. “What she is,” Brosnahan continued, “is curious. She’s insatiable. If she doesn’t know things, she wants to know them. And she doesn’t know any other way than forward.”The “Maisel” set sits on a cavernous soundstage at Steiner Studios, in the Brooklyn Navy Yard. Because Amazon ordered two seasons (the streaming service’s first immediate renewal, based on the strength of the pilot alone), the production designer Bill Groom’s intricate replicas of 1950s New York will stay in place until next spring, when “Maisel” goes back into production. Sherman-Palladino and Palladino wanted to shoot on location as much as possible, but so little of the midcentury metropolis remains intact. The crew hung a scrim the length of a city block painted with apartment buildings at night, each glowing window illuminating a different urban tableau. There is one closed corner of the set, strictly off-limits to outsiders: the box that houses the Gaslight Café. The creators don’t want strangers to watch while Brosnahan is doing stand-up. The only people allowed in are the extras in beatnik dress and a handful of crew members. In early episodes, for sound-editing purposes, she had to deliver her act to a silent crowd.I watched Brosnahan film a domestic scene from the seventh episode, in which she and her pert platinum friend, Imogene, played by Bailey De Young, are stuffing goody bags for a children’s birthday party inside her parents’ posh apartment. The scene was simple enough: Sort toys into bags while gossiping about Midge and Joel’s separation. But the number of props was overwhelming. There were dozens of period-appropriate trinkets — Tiny Tina baby carriages, Silly Putty, Bazooka Joe — and the women had to place them into each bag in a precise order, all while firing off rapid, breathless dialogue. It was the final shot of the night, and Brosnahan had already been cinched into a corset for six hours. Her brain was mush, she told me, “because we’d already shot 40 pages of dialogue that week,” but she attacked the scene with laser intensity as the two began shuffling knickknacks around.“Wait, there’s already gum in here,” Brosnahan, as Midge, said, her forehead crinkling.“I put it in there,” De Young said, playing Imogene slightly ditsy.“I’m doing gum.”“I thought you were doing candy cigarettes.”“Starting over,” Brosnahan sighs, dumping out the gift bags with a loud clatter onto the table.With each take, the two sped up the lines, hands flying. Speak, sigh, pour, speak, sigh, pour, faster and faster. Brosnahan pounced on her lines like a whizzing metronome. Midge is the kind of woman who sets a blistering tempo and waits for the rest of the world to catch up.Rachel Syme is a writer and cultural critic based in New York City. Her work has appeared in The Times, The New Yorker, The New Republic and elsewhere.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. Advertisement