http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/09/us/politics/bernie-sanders-has-killer-mike-in-his-corner.html
Bernie Sanders Has Killer Mike in His Corner - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
320
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichIn July, the Twitter account of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont sent a single tweet that convinced Michael Render that this was the most exciting candidate he had ever seen.Mr. Render, better known as Killer Mike, is a rapper by trade, one half of the duo Run the Jewels. He is also steeped in political history, particularly that of his native Atlanta. The senator’s statement about the importance of restoring the Voting Rights Act won an immediate endorsement from Killer Mike.“It’s official, I support @SenSanders” Mr. Render wrote on Twitter, using the senator’s handle. “His call 4 the restoration of the voters rights act sealed the deal for me.”Since then, Mr. Render, 40, has become one of Mr. Sanders’s most visible advocates. A series of video interviews he recorded with the senator in Atlanta were published on YouTube in December. Collectively, the videos, which range from six to 13 minutes in length, have been viewed well over a million times.Killer Mike has also traveled with the campaign, appearing at a rally in Chicago in late December just days after having his wisdom teeth removed. On Tuesday, he appeared on “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert,” where he spoke in support of his candidate.In an interview, Mr. Render repeated the message he delivered to the “Late Show” audience, saying that Mr. Sanders’s politics were directly in line with the ideology of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.“Bernie Sanders has been the only politician in my lifetime that I have heard talk about reform that was directly out of King-ian organizing philosophy,” he said.Mr. Render and other hip-hop artists who have voiced support for the senator — including Lil B, Big Boi and Bun B — are potentially important advocates for the Sanders campaign as it attempts to chip away at Hillary Clinton’s lead among black voters. A New York Times/CBS Poll conducted last month found that 82 percent of African-Americans who planned to vote in the Democratic primary supported Mrs. Clinton, while just 8 percent supported Mr. Sanders.On a call with reporters on Thursday, Ron Lester, a pollster for the Clinton campaign, said that in South Carolina, Mrs. Clinton was supported by 76 percent of black voters, while Mr. Sanders was polling at 10 percent.A Clinton aide emphasized Mrs. Clinton’s support among African-Americans and named African-American artists who are supporting her campaign, including Snoop Dogg, Usher and Waka Flocka Flame.But others say Mr. Sanders still has a chance to make up ground. While acknowledging Mrs. Clinton’s firm base of support among African-American voters, the Democratic strategist Donna Brazile said that “there’s enough votes on the table for Bernie.”“There are voters on the margin in the African-American community who don’t have history with the Clintons,” she said. “When it comes to scripture, Hillary Clinton knows the message and the melody for black voters. But Hillary has to earn the votes.”She also recalled that in 2007, Mrs. Clinton had been beating Barack Obama in the polls among African-Americans. But in the course of the campaign, black voters began to make a shift to the eventual president, and ended up representing a significant part of the coalition that elected him.Mr. Render supported Mr. Obama in that election, seeing him as a landmark candidate who would provide inspiration to a generation of African-American children. But he says that from a policy perspective, he is more enthusiastic about Mr. Sanders.Mr. Render grew up in a politically engaged family. Raised by his maternal grandparents, one a Democrat, the other a “fierce libertarian,” he became an activist in his community as a teenager. He worked with Black Teens for Advancement, an anti-violence organization in Atlanta, and later with the Atlanta/Fulton Commission on Children and Youth, and its program, Kids 4 a Change.“They were my passions, rapping and organizing,” he said. “Organizing helped me feel better about being able to affect my community immediately. Organizing gave me an outlet and rap music gave me a voice.”He started rapping under the pseudonym Skunk, but a local D.J. nicknamed him Killer Mike after he outrapped a room of competitors in high school and the name stuck. He said that he is not concerned about people ignoring his message because of the name, comparing himself to other musicians who have gone by the name “killer.”“You have to say to yourself, ‘well Jerry Lee Lewis wasn’t a killer and the band The Killers aren’t killers, so let me Google him and see what he’s about,’” he said. If the name holds outsize weight with people, he said, they “want to think badly of me already.”Mr. Render’s strong advocacy for Mr. Sanders is part of a long marriage between rap and politics. According to the hip-hop historian Shea Serrano, author of “The Rap Year Book” (to which I contributed a blurb), the two have been closely intertwined since the 1980s, when politicians started condemning gangster rappers like N.W.A., and rap groups like Public Enemy were writing explicitly political songs.Now, a new generation of political rappers, of which Mr. Render is an older representative, has ascended to the national stage. Kendrick Lamar, a rapper from Compton, Calif., who was nominated for eight Grammys this year, turned heads with “Alright,” a cutting song that prominently mentions police brutality. Vince Staples, a younger artist, has also gained notice for his social commentary.Mr. Render says the rise of his artistic profile has given his political message a boost.“I was as vocal and as adamant” in past years, he said. “Just more people are tuned in now.”Mr. Serrano agreed that any political credibility Mr. Render had with audiences was amplified by his artistic credibility.“You have this very charismatic and powerful presence in Killer Mike. I wasn’t paying attention to Bernie Sanders until Killer Mike put his name next to him. Then I was like, ‘I guess I better pay attention to Bernie Sanders now.’ ”“I think he’s done a phenomenal job, but he has a lot of ground to make up,” Ms. Brazile said of Mr. Render’s political advocacy. “Bernie Sanders doesn’t have 25 years of what I call attending church. But he has people who know exactly where the churches are, and that’s a good thing.”Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.Advertisement