https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/09/realestate/affordability-in-kensington-brooklyn.html
Affordability in Kensington, Brooklyn - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1843
AdvertisementSupported byLiving InBy Alison GregorDeirdre Lehn became aware of Kensington’s neighborliness as soon as she attended an open house. “We went to the open houses, and all the neighbors would come by, and folks were chatting with us and inviting us to come by for coffee,” Ms. Lehn said. “These were, like, people we didn’t know.”That sales pitch, however spontaneous, worked. Just over a year ago, Ms. Lehn and her family, former Cobble Hill residents, bought a two-family Victorian in northern Kensington, where similar homes sell for $850,000 to $900,000.Ms. Lehn says there were two reasons for the move. First, the family was being priced out of Cobble Hill; and second, Kensington seemed the kind of community where they could “lay down roots” — a place where people hung out on their front porches and got to know one another.“Kensington feels like a community where at least a big chunk of folks are invested in the neighborhood and interested in making it a neighborhood that can work for everybody,” Ms. Lehn said.With roughly 53,000 residents over about 107 square blocks, densely populated Kensington is known for its diversity; it is home to immigrants from more than 15 countries, and more than 20 languages are spoken, according to census data. The neighborhood has one of the city’s largest Bengali communities and significant populations of Russian, Mexican, Pakistani, Ukrainian, Haitian and Polish immigrants. There is also an enclave of Hasidic Jews.Beyond its immigrants, Kensington has an increasing number of young professionals, many of them unable to afford Brooklyn neighborhoods closer to Manhattan, like Park Slope and Windsor Terrace.Wholesale gentrification, however, is unlikely, said Liam McCarthy, a broker who founded the agency JMKBK. “This is very much a dynamic neighborhood, as opposed to rich people coming in and pushing everyone out,” he said. “There’s a lot of competition to be in the neighborhood.”The competition comes in part from farther-out Brooklyn. Kensington, historically a working-class area, is a landing place for people moving from places like Midwood and Sheepshead Bay, Mr. McCarthy said.“Kensington is the last affordable neighborhood before you get to Windsor Terrace and Park Slope if you’re trying to move closer to the city,” he added.Even so, longtime residents have noticed changes, both in home prices and population. Amara Mahmood, who has lived in Kensington since the age of 2 and now makes a home there with her husband and two young children, says she no longer sees many stay-at-home mothers or large families, especially in the pricier northern part of Kensington, which is closer to Prospect Park and Windsor Terrace.“I find that the parents are older — than me, at least,” Ms. Mahmood said. “I’m not 30 yet, and a lot of the parents I meet are in their late 30s.”In her opinion, one thing Kensington lacks is a community space where children can play indoors — though she isn’t sure her neighbors have the same priorities. “I feel like I’m in a minority when it comes to looking for a community space,” she said. “Other people are really looking for coffee shops and bookstores — they want Park Slope-type amenities in this area.”What You’ll FindAround the turn of the last century, Kensington was named after the borough in West London, and some of its housing seems to reflect that association. Detached and semidetached wood-frame Victorian homes, usually on 30-by-100-foot lots, flank its tree-lined streets, along with the occasional brick or limestone rowhouse.“In the northwest corner near Chester Avenue and Story Street, you have a lot of beautiful brick housing,” said Jasmina Nikolov, an agent with RealLifeNYC.com, “and some people say it’s reminiscent of London streets.” Many houses on these quaint side streets are two- and three-families, although Ocean Parkway has 20-story prewar co-ops and rentals. The neighborhood also has its share of six-story postwar apartments, Ms. Nikolov said.What You’ll PayA share of the housing along Ocean Parkway is rent-stabilized, but pricing for other apartments and homes has gone up in recent years. As an example of this, brokers pointed to a brick single-family home at 158 East Eighth Street near Prospect Park that sold for $680,000 in early 2011 and appreciated by 40 percent by last summer, selling for $949,000.In late January, there were about 17 homes on the market, said Mary LaRosa Lederer, the broker and owner of brooklyn-real. Single-families tend to sell for $750,000 to $950,000, multifamilies from $850,000 to $1.2 million, she said. A home at 241 East Third Street that sold for $1.05 million was the highest-priced single-family to sell in the last year, Ms. LaRosa Lederer said.Among co-ops and condominiums, studios sell for $130,000 to $150,000; one-bedrooms for $250,000 to $300,000; two-bedrooms for $400,000 to $450,000; and three-bedrooms for $575,000 to $650,000, she said.There are plentiful rental apartments, available in multifamilies and in high-rises, Ms. Nikolov said. Studios and one-bedrooms in multifamilies are renting for about $1,500 a month; two-bedrooms for about $2,000; and the rare three-bedrooms for at least $2,500. In the high-rises, rents can vary widely. One-bedrooms start at $1,200 a month, but they can range up to $2,200, Mr. McCarthy said.The CommuteMost people make the 45-minute commute to Midtown on the F train, which runs along McDonald Avenue; for drivers, the trip via Ocean Parkway can take as little as 25 minutes, if traffic cooperates. The G train also originates at Church Avenue, bound for other Brooklyn neighborhoods. The BM3 and the BM4, both express buses, arrive in Midtown in half an hour.What to DoLooking for your vodka in a bottle shaped like a Kalashnikov? Kensington’s got it. Addicted to South Asian sweets, like jalebi or gulab jamun? You can get those, too. Not to mention reasonably priced sari or salwar kameez, along with delicious mango ice cream, Argentinian-style glatt kosher steaks or parts for your model train. Visiting the myriad stores that line Church, Ditmas and 18th Avenues is a pastime in the neighborhood. “I’m on Church Avenue at least once a day,” Ms. Mahmood said.Two popular businesses are Brooklyn Banya, a Russian-Turkish bath house, where the party organizers Gemini & Scorpio have been holding hipster events of late; and Buzz-A-Rama, billed as the last slot-car racing tracks in the city. Despite the influx of Park Slopers, the amenities of gentrification have been slow to follow, though the first wine bar, Church Cafe, is anticipated soon.There is also Prospect Park, and cycling is on offer along the Ocean Parkway bike path to Coney Island. The Kensington Stables are nearby, as are shopping and restaurant rows on Church Avenue, Cortelyou Road and Fort Hamilton Parkway.The SchoolsKensington is zoned for three school districts, but the priciest part of the neighborhood is north of Beverly Road in District 15, which includes Park Slope. “I see prices going up, especially for homes in District 15,” Ms. LaRosa Lederer said.Public School 130 the Parkside School, which runs through Grade 5, got a B on its most recent city report card. On state exams last year, 33.7 percent of tested third-graders met standards in English, 37.5 percent in math, versus 28 percent and 33 percent citywide.A charter school called Brooklyn Prospect recently opened on Fort Hamilton Parkway for Grades 6 through 10, and eventually Grades 11 and 12 will be added, Ms. LaRosa Lederer said.The HistoryDevelopers who began building homes on farmland in Flatbush in the late-19th century were the ones who named the area. Building got underway in earnest during the 1920s, attracting Irish and Italian immigrants. By the early 1980s, Kensington was starting to draw the variety of immigrants that would make it the melting pot it is today.Advertisement