https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/books/review/karl-ove-knausgaard-my-struggle-book-six.html
What’s More Appealing: Eight Seasons of ‘Suits’ or Six Volumes of Karl Ove Knausgaard? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2169
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Daniel MendelsohnMY STRUGGLE Book 6 By Karl Ove Knausgaard Translated by Don Bartlett and Martin Aitken 1,156 pp. Archipelago Books. $33.Which would prevail — Scandinavian high literature or Meghan Markle?This is the question that dogged me between May and August of this year, during which time I devoted myself to two cultural undertakings: reading all of “My Struggle” and watching all of “Suits.” “My Struggle,” as readers of this or any other literary publication will know, is the sometimes brilliant, sometimes tedious, intermittently frustrating and always genre-defying 3,600-page autobiographical novel by the Norwegian writer Karl Ove Knausgaard that became a phenomenon among Anglo-American literati when the translation of Book 1 appeared here, in 2012, and whose sixth and last volume appears this month.“Suits,” as readers of pretty much every other publication will have known since Prince Harry of Wales became engaged last autumn to Markle, one of the show’s stars, is a popular USA Network legal drama, currently in its eighth season — now of course sans Markle, who has abandoned fictional dramas forever, although whether being a member of the British royal family (currently the subject of another popular TV series) constitutes “reality” is a question beyond the scope of this essay.But it is within the scope of this essay to ponder some implications of the differences between the two fictions, as I found myself doing over the course of the four months during which I was wrapped up in both — not the least of those implications being questions about precisely what fiction is and how it relates to reality, and the extent to which traditional narrative can be a delivery vehicle for saying something true about life. These, as it happens, lie at the intellectual and aesthetic heart of Knausgaard’s huge undertaking.Both “My Struggle” and “Suits” are serial entertainments, with the difference that the TV show is a turbid middlebrow melodrama that places all of its aesthetic chips on plot — patently contrived story lines engineered to generate further incident. (The gimmick that sets the whole drama in motion is typically high concept: The brilliant young lawyer who is the show’s hero never actually went to law school — a dire secret that motivates his, and eventually more and more of his colleagues’, actions, as they go to increasingly desperate lengths to conceal his past.) “My Struggle,” by contrast, has no plot. Confidently bestriding the increasingly popular gray zone that lies between fiction and autobiography (the genre the French call “autofiction”), it purports to be a minutely accurate reconstruction of the author’s life from earliest childhood to the present, populated by characters who bear the names of, or are identifiable with, people he knows in real life, its meandering narrative dutifully reproducing events as they unfolded with few visible attempts to shape or edit their flow to suit expectations of “story.” All this is an expression of the author’s conviction, announced in Book 1, that “our ludicrously inconsequential lives … had a part in this world.”The great technical ambition of this work is the attempt to reconstruct the rich inconsequentiality of our quotidian experience in prose stripped of the usual novelistic devices. Before embarking on “My Struggle,” Knausgaard had published two atmospheric novels — one an eccentric but rather beautiful re-creation of Genesis in a Norwegian setting, complete with angels — and since then he’s produced a series of four gossamer volumes, each named after a season and filled with artfully etched observations about everyday things and experiences; but in the magnum opus he claims to eschew any prettifying literary technique. Every object, every event, it seems, is reduced to its bare mechanical particulars: There’s a reason that an account of teenagers trying to get some booze for a New Year’s Eve party, which might have occupied a paragraph in another kind of novel, takes 70 pages. Where some authors might write “He drove off,” Knausgaard gives us “Yngve plumped down in the seat beside me, inserted the key in the ignition, twisted it, craned his head and began to reverse down the little slope.”Likewise, the volumes obey few of the laws of narrative structure; the most you can say for each is that it covers some phase of the author’s life, although not necessarily in chronological order. Book 1 is set in motion by the death, in the late 1990s, of Knausgaard’s schoolteacher father — by far the most powerful “character” here, a grandiose alcoholic whose abusiveness is elliptically yet indelibly evoked in a series of long flashbacks to the author’s childhood. These alternate with scenes set in the present, at the funeral home and the house where the father ended his days sordidly, sitting in his own excrement and surrounded by empty bottles. This first installment is by far the most artful (many would say the most successful) of the six, not least because it self-consciously emulates Proust, to whose own multivolume autobiographical novel Knausgaard acknowledges his indebtedness. Some readers of Book 1 will feel as though they’re on a treasure hunt for allusions to the French masterpiece: There are reflections on how different rooms feel, meditations on famous paintings, a preoccupation with a beloved grandmother, early fumblings with girls that result in premature ejaculations.Through all this, the author’s past is reconstituted at a level of detail so dense that you’re persuaded of the narrative’s factuality even as you’re forced to acknowledge that it has to have been, at the least, greatly enhanced, however close to some emotional truth or memory an individual scene or stretch of dialogue may be. This technique raises — as Knausgaard wants it to — questions about the limits both of memory and of fictional representation. “The 14 years I lived in Bergen,” he writes at the beginning of Book 5, “are long gone, no traces of them are left” — a sly claim, given that the 614 pages that follow constitute a seemingly “factual” re-creation of that very period.This faux factuality is the hallmark of all six volumes. Book 2 begins in the “present” of 2008, when Knausgaard, nearing 40, is living in Malmo, Sweden, with his wife, Linda, and their children, contemplating the novel that would become “My Struggle.” These scenes alternate with flashbacks to the period several years earlier when he had left Norway for Sweden; it is there, crippled by emotional and intellectual insecurities, that he arduously courts Linda, a poet with psychological troubles of her own. Book 3 leapfrogs back in time to provide an unexpected and often charming glimpse of his childhood and teenage years — the source of those awful insecurities (he describes his childhood as a “ghetto-like state of incompleteness”); in this volume, the author’s desire to recreate every aspect of the past extends to descriptions of his bowel movements. Book 4 finds the 18-year-old Karl Ove living in a tiny town in northern Norway, where he spends a year as a schoolteacher, struggling with an increasingly alarming drinking problem, his attraction to some of the underage girls in his class and his attempts to write serious fiction. Book 5 moves on to the author’s 20s and early 30s — those 14 years during which he lived in Bergen and experienced his first literary failures and successes, as well as an early marriage that collapsed in part because of his infidelity.As this summary suggests, the life recounted here is one of unusually intense emotional extremes of the sort that can make for powerful writing. The childhood abuse, the alcoholism, the affairs and breakups are the stuff of many a memoir — a genre that, curiously, doesn’t figure at all in the numerous digressions on literature that dot the landscape of intentional quotidian banality here, even though “My Struggle” has far more in common with memoir than it does with fiction. (I suspect that Knausgaard decided to call his work a novel because memoir continues to be seen as a “soft” genre, and he’s after bigger literary game.)And yet, despite all the emotional drama, I was rarely moved by this vast and often impressive work. As with some blogs or soap operas, the ongoing narration, however tedious it often is, can be weirdly addictive, and the suggestive play with fact and fiction can be intriguing. But in the end, the books left me cold and, not infrequently, exasperated. “Suits,” on the other hand, was offering just about everything that “My Struggle” wasn’t, and now and then even left me in tears — as artfully constructed narratives can do, propelling us toward emotions that flow naturally from certain kinds of situations. (There’s a marvelous scene in Season 5 when the young lawyer, guilt-ridden over the way in which his secret has compromised his friends’ and colleagues’ integrity, finally breaks down — as you will, too.)As it happens, the ability to evoke emotions through art is something the author of “My Struggle” worries about, too. Writing in Book 3 about his father once more, he acknowledges that “even with the greatest effort of will I am unable to recreate the fear; the feelings I had for him.” But why not? Why, when to give the reader access to the emotions the writer wants to conjure is one of the great aims of any kind of writing, does Knausgaard make this strange confession of defeat? Why, if “Suits” can catch you up in its characters’ often preposterous crises, can’t “My Struggle”?The answers to these questions become clear when you finally get to Book 6. In many ways, the final volume represents a continuation of the author’s characteristic matter and method — with the addition of a hall-of-mirrors story line, since this climactic installment is, in fact, about the publication and reception of the “My Struggle” books in Norway. It opens in autumn 2009, just as the first volume is about to appear, and closes two years later, at the moment the author finishes writing the very book you’re reading. If the previous volumes track the narrator’s evolution into a writer (the same arc traced in Proust’s novel), this one shows him at the moment he grasps the golden ring.[ Read an excerpt of “My Struggle: Book 6” here ]For that reason, one recurrent theme of the preceding volumes — the difficulty of balancing life and writing — comes to dominate this final book. Earlier, the fine-grained narration of lived life occasionally blossomed into ruminations on art, literature, music and life. Here, the two strains seem to be in desperate competition, each demanding more and more space until the narrative literally breaks apart, its two autobiographical sections — the first 400 and final 300 pages — separated by a 440-page digression on literature and history. (One of the many literary models that Knausgaard cites in this extended reflection on art and life is James Joyce’s “Ulysses,” which, he implies, inspired the structure of his own novel: He observes that Joyce’s epic contains a lengthy section, Molly Bloom’s soliloquy, that in tone, content and style is nothing like the rest of the book.)Perhaps because they have so much more to compete with, this volume’s evocations of domestic life — fraught spats with Linda about who will mind the children in the apartment in Malmo, grueling family vacations, simmering irritation with the stridently politically correct parents of the kids’ school friends, shopping for dinner parties — are not only exhaustive, but downright exhausting. Do we really need to know that his apartment building’s elevator is “the dark and narrow shaft that ran through the middle of the building”? It’s as if the particular, the concrete reality of “life” to which this author attaches so much importance, were trying to assert its claims in the face of the increasing preponderance of “art”: the metastasizing meditations on his method (writing must be “raw, in the sense of unrefined, direct, without metaphors or other linguistic decoration”), the proliferating and often brilliant mini-disquisitions on works of art and literature. These range over everything from the paintings of Munch, Turner and Leonardo (the latter’s canvases “so perfect” that — a wonderful if jarring thought — they seem “rather lazy”); to “Hamlet,” Francis Bacon and Kafka. At one point in his young manhood, Knausgaard writes in Book 5, he worried that he might end up as just a critic; there were moments when I wished he had.The difficulty of balancing his private and literary lives erupts in scenes that have a refreshingly absurdist edge. Knausgaard is terrific on the disorientation that goes with being an author who has made his private life public: the way in which the interviews you give never quite sound like the real you, or the oddness of having total strangers approach you in airports to share their feelings about your children. Still, it occurs to you that, in the hands of another writer (David Sedaris? Michael Chabon?), these and other scenes in “My Struggle” would have provided material for some comic relief amid the relentless self-seriousness.There was certainly nothing funny about the event that hangs over this final book: the public controversy that accompanied the novels’ publication in Norway. This volume’s preoccupation with the meaning and methods of literature is, you realize, inevitable, given that the story it tells shows the devastating consequences of the author’s decision to depict life “raw” — to use real people, often with their real names. His father’s brother, for instance, threatened to sue him and his publisher after reading the manuscript of Book 1, insisting that all “errors of documentary fact” be removed — a demand that inevitably leads Knausgaard the auteur to ponder what a “fact” of a remembered life might be. (He later admits to a former girlfriend who appears in the novel that he doesn’t remember “exact details” but, rather, “moods, that kind of thing.” Hmm.)More troubling still was the nervous breakdown that his bipolar wife suffered after the publication of the first few novels, which paint an intimate portrait of the couple’s courtship, passions, quarrels and, increasingly, competitiveness. (Linda, too, is a writer.) Her mental collapse, to which the final 150 pages of the new novel are devoted, is evoked in the usual minute detail — which here, you feel, does in fact serve a strong narrative purpose, recreating Linda’s torturous descent in a genuinely agonizing way. Knausgaard understands that this is a gruesomely high price to pay for his lofty literary aims. But for all his theorizing about literature and modernity, he’s a true Romantic, in love with the sacrifices that must be made for Art — even when they’re not his: “And if you want to describe reality as it is, for the individual, and there is no other reality, you have to really go there, you can’t be considerate.”All this may well have you wondering just what kind of man this writer is, and it is to Knausgaard’s credit that he struggles with precisely this question in the book’s 450-page central section. This book-length excursus, representing a radical stylistic departure from the rest of the volume (this is the “Molly Bloom” section), explains, at last, his work’s strange and provocative title, which it shares with another famous book: Adolf Hitler’s autobiography, “Mein Kampf.” Until Book 6, and indeed through this volume’s first long autobiographical section, you’re tempted to take that title as a weak joke: What, after all, could the autobiography of one of history’s greatest monsters have in common with that of a middle-class, middle-aged Norwegian writer with his trivial day-to-day doings? (“I donned my Ted Baker shirt, which stuck to my still-damp shoulder blades and would not hang straight at first, then I got into my Pour jeans with the diagonal pockets, which usually I didn’t like, there was something so conventional about them. …” )But Knausgaard wants to argue that any human life is, in the end, just that — a life. And it’s here that his ideological commitment to minutely representing reality — or, rather, his fervent belief that the particulars of our lives, in their complexity and their vivifying incoherence, always trump any attempt to impose ideology on them — achieves a strange fulfillment.The central section, entitled “The Name and the Number,” begins with a reflection on the fact that, owing to his uncle’s threats, Knausgaard’s father can never be named in the book over which he so memorably looms, a necessity that compels the author to ponder the strange power of names. This, in turn, leads to a thrilling — there is no other word — 50-page explication of “The Straitening,” a poem by Paul Celan, a Holocaust survivor, in which the Holocaust is never named although it hovers over every word: another case in which presence and absence float in a kind of negative equilibrium.All this, finally, brings us to the main event, by far the finest thing in this strange book and, in my experience, the best thing Knausgaard has written, marked by enormous intellectual panache and quite different from anything else in the novel (it’s amazing how lively the writing suddenly is when he’s not writing about himself): a nearly 400-page close reading of “Mein Kampf,” complete with detours through related texts, in which the author tries to recover and reproduce the lived experience of the frustrated, depressed and impoverished young man who would become the Nazi tyrant. The life of that sad human being, as Knausgaard’s far-ranging and brilliant analysis implies, bears more than a little resemblance to that of Knausgaard himself: the tyrannical father, the grandiose dreams of cultural achievement, the humiliations and the poverty. Yet Hitler became Hitler, and Knausgaard is just himself. A life is a life; that’s the struggle. No life “means” anything more than itself.This powerful digression is ultimately joined to a sorrowful reflection on the July 2011 mass shooting on Norway’s Utoya island, where 69 people were shot by a sole gunman, Anders Behring Breivik, pretending to be a police officer. Here, Knausgaard uses the insights afforded by his reading of “Mein Kampf” to theorize about the similarities between Hitler and Breivik. What made the inhumanity of the two possible, he suggests, was the fact that their psyches embraced only the first and third grammatical persons: an “I” (the grandiose perpetrator) and a “they” (the dehumanized victims) but never a “you” — the second person, who, in confronting us one-on-one, forces us to engage an “other” as a human being.Yet this intriguing notion forces you into an uncomfortable reconsideration of Knausgaard himself. As I closed the final volume of “My Struggle,” struck by how little this hugely ambitious artistic undertaking had moved me, I thought about the emotions that course through it and how they are presented. Like the grandiose figure he writes about in his masterly central section, Knausgaard, too, is always telling you about his feelings and how profound they are, his weeping, his lusts, his ambitions, his insecurities, his frustrations and regrets. But precisely because the feelings are reported rather than evoked, they belong only to the author; between him and his characters — “I” and “they” again — there is no room for “you,” the audience.This poses a serious challenge for the reader — and, indeed, suggests a certain incoherence in the author’s aesthetic ideology. At one point early on, Knausgaard waxes emotional about how moved he can be by certain pre-20th-century paintings — artworks, as he puts it, “within the artistic paradigm that always retained some reference to visible reality.” But those works move us because the reality to which they refer is a shared reality (the world), whereas the overwhelming reality of “My Struggle” is Knausgaard himself. The books constitute a kind of genre novel in which the author himself has become the genre.Hence their effect: If your experiences in life happen to overlap with the author’s, you can find yourself stirred by certain passages; still others may leave you impressed by his intellectual dexterity, as in the dazzling analysis of “Mein Kampf.” But to be conscious of how the novel functions, of how it’s designed to make you “think” about the “subject,” means that you’re in the presence of a work that is, in the end, less like the 19th-century paintings the author so admires than like a very current genre indeed: conceptual art, which invites you to nod in recognition when you “get” how it generates its meanings, but rarely provokes large human feeling.It is for this reason that “My Struggle” in fact bears so little resemblance to the work that the author himself so frequently refers to as an inspiration, and to which his magnum opus has so eagerly been compared by reviewers: Proust’s “In Search of Lost Time.” In that novel, the life of the narrator, its arc from childhood to middle age, climaxing in his becoming a writer, functions as a prism through which virtually every aspect of the lived reality of the author’s time — art, music, literature, sex, society, class, theater, technology, science, history, war, memory, philosophy — is refracted, in a way that enlarges you, gives you a heightened sense of the world itself, its contents and possibilities.Knausgaard’s creation, for all its vastness and despite its serious intellectual aims and attainments, reduces the entire world to the size of the author. This is happening everywhere now — as the writer himself, with characteristic insight, recognizes in a long passage about the ways in which the internet and social media, by forcing us endlessly to perform our own lives, threaten to trivialize the very notion of selfhood: “Our identities … gradually recalibrate toward the expectation of an observing ‘everyone’ or ‘all.’” But, just as typically, he seems unaware of the extent to which he and his novel participate in the disturbing phenomenon that he so acutely analyzes. What work more than his deserves to be the great new classic of the age of the blog?Daniel Mendelsohn is the author, most recently, of “An Odyssey: A Father, a Son, and an Epic.” He teaches at Bard.Advertisement