https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/02/arts/television/game-of-thrones-bran-interview.html
Isaac Hempstead-Wright on ‘Game of Thrones,’ Bran Stark’s Return and Hodor - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1721
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jeremy EgnerBran Stark, missing in action since the end of Season 4 of “Game of Thrones,” makes his return to the story on Sunday night.The eldest remaining Stark son, played by Isaac Hempstead-Wright, spent all of Season 5 offscreen, training in a cave under a tree with the Three-Eyed Raven, a mystical guru played in Season 6 by Max von Sydow. There Bran has been developing and refining metaphysical powers that will play a significant role in the story, including abilities to “warg” into the psyches of animals and to have visions of the past, the future, and of distant events, a gift known as “greensight” in the “Thrones” world.[Ahead of the final season of “Game of Thrones,” relive it all with our ultimate watching guide, including episode recaps and deep plot dives.]“When we meet him in Season 6, he’s no master yet but he can do some really cool things with his power,” Mr. Hempstead-Wright said. (In Luke Skywalker terms, he added, Bran “has gone to Dagobah.”)The actor, 17, spent the year off on his schooling. “I’m still maintaining a fairly normal existence,” he said. But he allowed that his more active role in Season 6 “kind of clinched” the notion that he’d like to keep acting even after his time on “Game of Thrones” is over.“Previously I was always like, ‘I’m no actor,’” he said. “But now I’ve thought, no, I do really enjoy this.”Mr. Hempstead-Wright recently discussed returning to “Game of Thrones,” Bran’s role in the story and Hodor jokes. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.What’s in store for Bran this season?This destiny of his has been calling ever since the very first season. There have been hints of what these powers he possesses might be, and what they might be able to do, but they’ve been always kind of vague windows into it for a brief few seconds. So Bran has never had a chance to do his thing. Every character has their particular strength and Bran has been trying to get to his for the past five seasons. So when he gets there, finally, it’s an opportunity for him to completely immerse himself in this new kind of character. He’s got his own calling and his own sense of self, and his own very important place in the world of Westeros.What is Bran’s role in the story as a whole?That kind of gets explored this season. I don’t think he’s necessarily going to be the king, and he’s not a vengeful character either. I feel like he’ll be an enabler. He’ll be the kind of person who can sit around with this kind of Zen Mother Nature type control over the whole kingdom, and keep everything in order and in balance. That’s what his place is. I feel like he’s kind of the key unlocking the world, really, and freeing it of all the tension and warring.Is there anything that was surprising about this season?The way it’s all tying up this year. “Game of Thrones” has always been this vast, sprawling network of story lines that maybe cross for one second and then shoot off. But this season they’re all starting to look like they’re coming back toward a central focal point and pave the way for epic, epic things.After taking a year off from the show, as an actor were you able to pick up where you left off?There was definitely a period of readjustment. I felt like it in that year “Game of Thrones” grew more vast and phenomenal. Coming back onto it was like, ‘Wow, has it changed? Will anyone remember me? Am I still a part of this?’ I’d also forgotten how to act, pretty much. It was like, “Right! Now I remember. There’s the cameras, got it.”What it was like to work with Max von Sydow?It was really quite extraordinary. He’s such a gentleman. He’s quite old and frail now — he’s 87. But his presence on set is astounding. A kind of hush descends upon the room and everyone is just kind of watching him create magic with his voice and his words and the character.In Bran’s visions he can walk. Was that nice for a change?Oh, it was really nice to walk. Although after a day or two of walking around on a set, it was like, “Actually, you know what? Can I get back in the cave and lie down for a bit?” I actually fell asleep.Does Hodor still carry you around?Well, we’re just sitting around. Luckily he doesn’t have to pick me up because it would look really silly. My legs would be dragging across the ground.Hodor jokes have probably gotten old by now, but do you guys still make them on the set?Oh yeah. Every now and again someone will kick off a “Hodor,” and then it will kind of bounce around the entire set. “Hodor!” “Hodor.” “HODOR!”Advertisement