https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/08/world/middleeast/israel-election-netanyahu.html
The Israeli Election: A Journey to Netanyahu’s Base - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
560
AdvertisementSupported byPrime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s leadership has divided the country, but can Israelis imagine a future without him?By Kassie Bracken, Emily Rhyne and Seth DaltonIsrael has been in the grip of a pivotal election, with voters torn between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Benny Gantz, a former army chief.The leadership of Mr. Netanyahu, who is entangled in a corruption scandal, has deepened divisions and pushed the country to the right. Still, many voters credit him for keeping Israel safe and strong, adding that security was the issue most important to them and that Mr. Netanyahu remained the best option on the ballot.In many ways, this election has been a referendum on Mr. Netanyahu and the direction that he has taken the country. So, we wanted to hear from his supporters and listen to why they were sticking by him.Our reporters traveled to the border with Gaza, where Palestinians continue to protest against an Israeli blockade that has suffocated them, putting the Israel Defense Forces on high alert for violence.In the nearby communities in the south, Mr. Netanyahu’s hardline stance makes him popular with a diverse group of voters. One told us bluntly: “Hamas is Hezbollah, Hezbollah is Iran, Iran is my enemy, that’s it,” she said, saying that she believed Mr. Netanyahu shared her feelings. “For me, no one can replace him.”Every Israeli election has been about security, which is why Mr. Gantz has tried to emphasize that he will be just as tough, but without the divisiveness of Mr. Netanyahu’s political style. He has described himself as a little to the right on security and a little to the left on social issues.But to win a parliamentary majority and become prime minister, Mr. Gantz’s party may have to form a coalition with parties well to his left, adding a layer of uncertainty for voters about how he’ll run the country.The question that looms for Israelis is: After 10 years of Mr. Netanyahu’s leadership, can they imagine a future without him?Advertisement