https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/25/world/europe/yanukovych-ukraine-maidan-protests-russia.html
Ukraine’s Ex-Leader Regrets Not Breaking Up Protests That Led to His Fall - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
440
AdvertisementSupported byBy Ivan NechepurenkoROSTOV-ON-DON, Russia — In a rare public appearance, Viktor F. Yanukovych, the former president of Ukraine, said Friday that he regrets he did not impose martial law and order troops to disperse the mass protests that toppled his government and forced him into exile in Russia.“My main mistake was that I was not resolute enough to sign an order,” Mr. Yanukovych told dozens of journalists at a news conference. “But even today, I would not sign this order because Ukraine was divided then and that would unleash a civil war.”The protests began late in 2013 when Mr. Yanukovych’s government announced that it was suspending its plans to sign a trade deal with the European Union and that it would instead seek closer economic ties with Russia.The demonstrations, centered in Maidan Square in Kiev, grew in size and intensity, attracting international attention. But it was the shooting of scores of protesters in February 2014 as they tried to enter the government district that drew widespread condemnation and led many of Mr.Yanukovych’s political allies to abandon him. Security forces, after hearing that they would be blamed for the shootings and that protesters had seized hundreds of guns, left the capital.Mr. Yanukovych fled Kiev, and Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, sent special forces to bring him to Russia. Moscow contended that Mr. Yanukovych’s downfall had been the result of a Western-inspired coup and threw its support to a revolt then taking shape Ukraine’s east.More than 9,600 people have died in clashes there between Ukraine’s government and rebel forces, according to the United Nations.Earlier on Friday, Mr. Yanukovych visited a courthouse in Rostov-on-Don, a Russian city near the Ukrainian border, where he tried to testify via a video link in the Ukrainian trial of five former special forces police officers charged with shooting protesters.After 20 minutes of proceedings, the trial was adjourned because Ukrainian nationalists in Kiev had prevented the five suspects from leaving a detention center. Mr. Yanukovych is now expected to testify on Monday.At the news conference, Mr. Yanukovych and his lawyer accused the Ukrainian government of deliberately dragging out the trial in order to prevent him from telling an alternative version of what had happened. He said he had collected three volumes of evidence that proved his argument that he had nothing to do with the shootings.Ukraine’s interior minister, Arsen Avakov, called Mr. Yanukovych’s actions “another provocation organized by a puppet of Moscow.”Vitaly Tytych, a representative of the victims, said in a comment on Facebook that Mr. Yanukovych should not be treated as a witness by the court, but as a suspect and the main organizer of the massacre.Mr. Yanukovych, who faces criminal charges in Ukraine, has long contended that he could not receive a fair trial there and would fear for his safety.At the news conference, he said he had left Ukraine only with his “hand luggage.” He has been living in Russia ever since, appearing in public only a few times.Mr. Yanukovych said he supports Ukraine’s territorial integrity, but he blamed radicals in Kiev for the armed conflict in the east and for Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014.Russia’s role in these events has been exaggerated, he said. “There is a big interest in blaming it all on Russia,” he said. “Ukraine has become a hostage of this situation.”Follow Ivan Nechepurenko on Twitter @INechepurenko.Advertisement