https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/16/arts/television/game-of-thrones-season-6-episode-4-daenerys-tyrion.html
‘Game of Thrones’: Tyrion, Daenerys and the Art of the Deal - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1723
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy James PoniewozikIn a 2015 interview for GQ, Bill Simmons asked Barack Obama which character on “Game of Thrones” he most identified with. His favorite, the president said, was Tyrion Lannister. (More specifically: “the dwarf, what’s his name?”)The president didn’t elaborate as to why, though you could guess. Who doesn’t love Tyrion? He’s smart, he’s witty, he likes a good glass of wine or three. What’s more, he and the president share a favorite quote.[Ahead of the final season of “Game of Thrones,” relive it all with our ultimate watching guide, including episode recaps and deep plot dives.]In Sunday’s episode, “Book of the Stranger,” Tyrion negotiated a peace deal between Meereen and the enemy states of Slaver’s Bay, justifying the deal with a line that is almost verbatim one that the president used in real life to defend the nuclear deal with Iran: “As a clever man once told me,” Tyrion remarked, “we make peace with our enemies, not our friends.”What president wouldn’t want to hear his worldview echoed in the smooth dialogue of Peter Dinklage? But by contrasting Tyrion’s realism with the more incendiary leadership style of Daenerys (Emilia Clarke) — breaker of chains, mother of dragons and Tyrion’s boss — “Stranger” also suggested that Tyrion’s pragmatism is a political tough sell, and that it has its limits.We’ve heard the “make peace with our enemies” line on this show before: in Season 1, Littlefinger counseled it to Ned Stark, an inflexibly moral man who disregarded the advice and ended up a head on a stick. In our own world, President Obama is not the first to use the phrase, some variation of which has been attributed to Moshe Dayan, Yitzhak Rabin and others.More broadly, Tyrion is arguing for realpolitik principles that, our own election has shown, never stop being controversial: choosing deals over ideals. It’s the sort of approach that, in foreign policy, Donald J. Trump has attacked as making “a terrible deal” with an untrustworthy enemy, that in domestic policy Bernie Sanders has dismissed as “asking for half a loaf.”Tyrion’s deal is morally complicated by the fact that it involves slavery. Dany, with her Unsullied and her dragons, overthrew the slavelords, who have started a bloody insurgency and taken back the cities outside Meereen. Tyrion offers them time and money: seven years to transition from a slave economy, and compensation for their losses.Pragmatic? Maybe, but Abe Lincoln, he ain’t.The racial dynamics of American slavery may not map directly onto those in “Game of Thrones” — in the source books, slaves come from many countries, sometimes the same as their slavers. But “Game of Thrones” is made to be watched in our world, where the optics of a rich white man bargaining away the freedom of darker slaves is unsettling. (There’s an Orientalist overtone to the whole Essos story line, in which Dany is often cast as a white savior and Tyrion is a kind of colonial viceroy, mangling the language and trying to tame the exotic East with Western efficiencies.)“Book of the Stranger” plays up this discomfort, focusing on the incredulous reaction of freed slaves Missandei and Grey Worm, even if they have little choice but to back Tyrion in the end. As Missandei points out, however sad a life Tyrion has had, his brief stint in chains doesn’t mean he knows anything about spending a life as property.“Game of Thrones,” like the source books by George R. R. Martin, has a bias toward its horse-trading Tyrions and Littlefingers. The morally rigid, like Ned and Stannis, break where they can’t bend.It’s not an amoral story — even if the series loves building up sadistic villains — but its general philosophy is, being good is useless unless you can also do good. And doing good, like Dany’s chain-breaking, only matters to the extent that you can do the hard, boring work of maintaining their welfare.But Tyrion’s worldview is also insufficient by itself. He’s able to cut a deal — which may or may not work in the end — only because Dany had upended the slave economy in the first place. Would Tyrion ever have done that on his own?Doubtful. He’s too practical, and practicality tells him, as he airily tells the slave masters, that the rich and poor will always be with us. During his stint as King Joffrey’s Hand in King’s Landing, his goal — and he was good at it — was to keep his monstrous nephew’s worst impulses in check while trying to manage the crown’s finances and keep House Lannister from being ousted.Better him than Joffrey — or Tywin — but in the end his impulse was to work within the system and thus keep the system going: to create a kinder, gentler Lannisterism. His talent is greasing the wheels, whereas Dany, in her own words, wants “to break the wheel.”The pyrotechnic last scene of “Stranger” contrasted Tyrion’s style of accommodation with Dany’s permanent revolution. Her imprisonment in Vaes Dothrak brought her back to where she started, geographically and figuratively.After leading and losing a khalasar, after conquering Meereen and fleeing it, Dany is still all about blowing up the system. Rather than escape quietly, she burns down everything, freeing the dosh khaleen and — again, but on an apparently bigger scale — becoming khaleesi. In case you didn’t notice history repeating, the episode ends with Dany, fireproof breasts and all, stripped naked by the flames just as she was by the pyre in which her dragons were born in Season 1.Will this story end any better a second time? Has Dany grown, or is she destined to fly from revolution to revolution, leaving chaos behind? The show’s head seems to be with Tyrion, but its heart is with Dany — certainly immolating a temple full of rapists feels better than plying slave traders with prostitutes.It may turn out that neither of them has an effective answer: Maybe Sansa or Jon or Arya will. But just as the world of “Game of Thrones” is both ice and fire, “Stranger” suggested that true leadership ultimately requires the head to work with the heart.In this contentious political season, the show suggests a kind of radically moderate unity ticket of revolutionary and functionary. You need Danys to change the world and Tyrions to fix it. Every wheel breaker needs her deal maker.Advertisement