https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/27/opinion/letters/michael-cohen-testimony-trump.html
Opinion | Michael Cohen’s Testimony About Trump - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
910
AdvertisementSupported bylettersReaders discuss a dramatic hearing in which Mr. Cohen expressed regret for his actions on behalf of the president and was harshly attacked by Republicans. To the Editor:Re “Cohen Says President Told Him to Lie About Hush Money Payments” (nytimes.com, Feb. 27):Whether we believe what Michael Cohen has to say during his testimony, we deserve the opportunity — the simple opportunity — to hear his testimony. Instead, the G.O.P. members of the House Oversight and Reform Committee are constantly ceding their time to Representative Jim Jordan, the bulldog who harasses and intimidates Mr. Cohen instead of spending this valuable time letting the American public hear questions and answers.In a court of law, witnesses cannot be harassed by either side. These lawmakers might do well to keep that in mind.Connie SchiedPortland, Ore.To the Editor:Republicans in Congress appear skeptical of Michael Cohen’s testimony because — oh my gosh — he’s lied in the past. Perhaps they can tell us just which current or former Trump administration or campaign officials, including the president, they would believe?Stephen PolitBelmont, Mass.To the Editor:How times have changed. Two years ago, Michael Cohen was reviled as a liar and a Donald Trump minion who was not to be believed. Now, Congress places Mr. Cohen, a convicted felon, on a pedestal as a credible witness. Andrew KoSan Marino, Calif.To the Editor:What have we learned from these hearings so far? That President Trump may have lost his “fixer,” Michael Cohen, but he has many more “fixers” among the G.O.P. members of Congress.Elaine L. ShuteSurry, Me.To the Editor:Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, called it “laughable” that anyone would believe Michael Cohen, because he is a “convicted liar.” But Mr. Cohen wasn’t convicted of just any lie; he falsely testified to Congress that President Trump stopped negotiating with the Russians in January 2016 about building a Trump Tower in Moscow. That is the same claim the president himself made throughout his campaign, and which he repeated up until the day Mr. Cohen confessed it wasn’t true.It was Mr. Cohen, not Mr. Trump, who first came clean about this lie. And it was Mr. Trump, not Mr. Cohen, who benefited from it.In short, if this lie means that Mr. Cohen is not to be believed, it affects the president’s credibility even more.Robert HelfandSimsbury, Conn.Advertisement