https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/17/realestate/330000-homes-in-minnesota-missouri-and-maine.html
$330,000 Homes in Minnesota, Missouri and Maine - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
510
AdvertisementSupported byWhat you GetA Craftsman bungalow in St. Paul, a contemporary ranch house in Springfield and a shingled cottage in Long Island.By Julie Lasky24 PhotosView Slide Show ›The Macalester-Groveland neighborhood of St. Paul has a mix of single-family home styles and prices. This bungalow is at the modest end. It is four blocks from the Mississippi River, close to three college campuses and a block and a half from the original Snuffy’s Malt Shop.Size: 1,438 square feetPrice per square foot: $233Indoors: Entry is through an unheated porch, into a living room with narrow-strip wood floors and a vintage-tile fireplace surround and hearth. The dining room is through an archway with decorative scrolls and has picture-rail molding. The kitchen was renovated a few years ago with new granite counters, lighting, stainless steel appliances and a center island on wheels, so that you can slide it to the side if you want more room for cooking.The main floor also includes two bedrooms and a bathroom with a combined bath-and-shower clad in subway and mosaic tile. Upstairs, under the roof gable, is a third bedroom with a closet.A second bathroom with a shower is on the basement level, along with two rooms that could be finished as bedrooms.Outdoor space: The 0.11-acre lot includes a detached one-car garage with room for bicycles.Taxes: $4,516Contact: Pete Rathjen, Counselor Realty, 651-308-4550; counselorrealty.comThis house stands out from its traditional neighbors in the Fox Grape subdivision in southeast Springfield — and, for that matter, in much of the city — because of its contemporary style. It is next to a shopping center with several restaurants and a movie theater.Size: 2,692 square feetPrice per square foot: $117Indoors: A foyer steps down to a sunken living room with a mirrored brick fireplace chimney rising to a 15-foot ceiling and a wall of built-in cabinets and shelves. The dining room has a free-standing structure with a wet bar concealed behind folding frosted-glass doors, as well as a granite dining table that comes with the property.Behind this space is a breakfast room with a storage wall; it is attached to a galley kitchen with a walk-in pantry.The owners added the 440-square-foot sunroom, which includes a safe room for retreating during tornadoes. (The house does not have a basement.)To the right of the foyer, through a pivoting door, is a master bedroom with a fireplace. The en suite bathroom has rubber-tile flooring, a glass-block wall and a marble-topped vanity. The suite also includes a large walk-in closet.Two additional bedrooms at the rear of the house are set up as a study and office; they share a hallway bathroom. There is also a laundry room.Outdoor space: The house sits on a 0.23-acre corner lot and is connected to a three-car garage. The sunroom walks out through French doors with leaded-glass windows to a rear deck with a gazebo and an integrated ramp for accessibility. An in-ground sprinkler system helps maintain the large lawn.Taxes: $2,378 (2018)Contact: Ethel Curbow, Coldwell Banker Vanguard, 417-300-1513; flexmls.comLong Island, which seceded from Portland, Me., in 1993 and has a year-round population of 200, is six miles from the mainland and accessible by ferry throughout the year. Travel time averages 45 minutes. The island has a small market, a library, a community center, multiple beaches and a school with 13 students in kindergarten through fifth grade and two teachers. This property is a seven-minute walk from the ferry terminal and is being sold fully furnished.Size: 1,365 square feetPrice per square foot: $245Indoors: At one point a bed-and-breakfast, the house is zoned for hospitality as well as residential use, with a permit. It has been upgraded with a space-heating system that can be set to turn on automatically to prevent pipes from freezing when the house is unoccupied.At some point a wall in the main floor was removed to create an open living and dining room with a U-shaped kitchen with white cabinets. These rooms have wood floors, beamed ceilings and molding. Beyond is a den with a timber ceiling and a wood stove, as well as the home’s only bathroom, which has a combined tub and shower. There is also a laundry room. An unheated three-season porch with an attached storage room is off the den.The upstairs level originally included four bedrooms, but two were combined into a single space with two doors.Outdoor space: The 0.2-acre property has a shed, a spacious backyard and a view of Casco Bay from the front yard. It is at an elevation that does not require flood insurance.Taxes: $1,408 (2018)Contact: Alexa Oestreicher, Legacy Properties Sotheby’s International Realty, 207-329-9307; sothebysrealty.comFor weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.Advertisement