https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/14/style/shonda-rhimes-can-say-yes-so-can-i.html
If Shonda Rhimes Can Say Yes, So Can I - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1504
AdvertisementSupported byBy Henry AlfordIt is the hallmark of most adults, as we lurch zombielike into middle age, increasingly to become distilled versions of ourselves. What once burgeoned or flourished now crystallizes or self-embalms. In the last year, I started doing needlepoint while drinking a gin and tonic; currently nothing holds my interest like “The Great British Baking Show” and its explications of self-saucing puddings. My friends call me Danger.Up until Thanksgiving 2013, Shonda Rhimes, the creator of “Grey’s Anatomy” and “Scandal” and executive producer of “How to Get Away With Murder,” was in a similar rut. But at that holiday meal, Ms. Rhimes’s sister told her, “You never say yes to anything.” This prompted Ms. Rhimes — a workaholic, 43-year-old single mother of three whose stage fright had her turning down many requests for public appearances — to spend a year saying yes to new opportunities. By the end of her memoir, “Year of Yes: How to Dance It Out, Stand in the Sun and Be Your Own Person,” Ms. Rhimes had lost more than 100 pounds, given the commencement speech at Dartmouth, appeared on “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” stopped working on the weekends and chosen the writing life over a marriage proposal.Eager, as I would tell a friend, “to get a little Shonda in my life,” I recently spent a month emulating Ms. Rhimes. I started by making a list of activities that I aspired to but that, as “The Year of Yes” put it, were “scary” or took me “out of my comfort zone.” I wondered, will I, like the “Grey’s Anatomy” character Cristina Yang, learn to “dance it out,” or, like the “Scandal” heroine, Olivia Pope, learn to “stand in the sun” — or will I dedicate the rest of my life to tucking my Smith & Hawken gardening clogs into my PBS tote bag?Two items on my list were physical challenges. I was right to be scared of them. For my shoulder soreness, I wanted to try an inversion table. At La Casa Spa & Wellness Center on 20th Street, I paid $60 to lie for 20 minutes on what looked like the world’s most elaborate ironing board and tip myself upside down so that, unsupervised and without straps or a belt, I was hanging from the tops of my feet for 90 seconds at a crack. I gained new admiration for Bruce Wayne’s metatarsals. The next day, my shoulders seemed unchanged, but my legs were a lake of fire. Would I return? As Ms. Rhimes would say, “Girl, please.”It was equally disruptive to my carapace, but far more fun and cosmic, to attend a butoh class in Midtown with my friend Camilla. A juddering, trancelike form of dance that emerged from postwar Japan (you may have seen it in Madonna’s video of “Nothing Really Matters”), butoh has you concentrate all your weight and gravity into one part of your body such that the rest of your body twitches and flaps. Camilla told me that some years ago she marveled at a fellow butoh classmate’s dancing, “but it turned out she was having an epileptic fit,” she said. I loved the teacher (a thin, intense Frenchwoman named Vangeline), as well as an exercise in which we pretended to have no faces. But the next day: lake of fire No. 2.I suppose it should have come as no surprise that I liked pretending that I had no face, given that the bulk of my yes list had to do with anxieties about other people, particularly acquaintances. First, I wanted to eat dinner alone in a restaurant where I was likely to run into people I knew. At the West Village trattoria Via Carota one Thursday night, I was told I could wait 45 minutes for a table, or sit at a tiny drinks table in the coat area. Ninety seconds later, I was sitting alone underneath a lot of outerwear hung high on a wall being surveilled by the 10 or so people standing and waiting for tables. Worse, the octopus I ordered turn out to be a single, throbbing, large, perverse-looking tentacle. #LonelyManEatsLargeLeginCoatroom.I asked the two women seated next to me if they wanted me to make more room for them. “That’s O.K.,” one said. “We’re getting a real table.” Meanwhile, I’d spotted not the Vanity Fair and GQ editors I’d seen on my other trips to the restaurant, but a woman I went to high school with. I could easily imagine my evening turning into the prom scene from “Carrie,” my high school chum unleashing huge bags of squid ink hidden inside the down parka over my head.But, no. I didn’t see my friend leave. Moreover, my vantage point on the waiting diners revealed two people who, waiting for their dates to arrive, were so uncomfortable and rattled about standing alone that my brain computed, “Well, at least I’m not that insecure.” And so my social unease was cosseted by the gentle emollience of vague superiority. Yay!Another acquaintance-based challenge was to spend time with someone I like but who wants something that I cannot give. For me, this “something” tends to be publicity. But it can also be money, contacts, work, gossip or approval; I tend to tell a lot of white lies and then evanesce couchward. But this time I said yes to lunch with the charming editor of a new book I’d read and liked (but wasn’t going to write about), and I’d said yes to a reading given by a hilarious novelist whose book I’d blurbed (same). In both instances, I was glad I made the effort, a sentiment much aided by the fact that I told the editor, 10 minutes into our lunch, “I’m so sorry I can’t help with publicity,” and I bought the novelist’s book at his reading and pushed myself to ask a Q. at his Q. and A. Shoulders: lowered.As I continued with the yes project, I worried from time to time that Ms. Rhimes’s approach might be better suited for the unconfident. I, by contrast, am fairly confident but sometimes unmotivated. My personal demons are the new couch slipcover I’ve been meaning to buy for four years now, my unfinished literary output, my squandered friendships. However, these things don’t scare me; they’ve simply curdled in a warm bath of benign neglect. But ultimately I decided that defying fear might serve me better than a traditional to-do list might. The proverbial slipcovers I’d reupholstered in the past hadn’t fostered other similar actions, whereas the swagger required by dining alone, say, might. And that, as Ms. Rhimes might say, would be “tight.”Were there yeses that I was unable to complete? Uh-huh. They tended to be challenges that were thrown at me rather than those I’d devised. Leaving for my office one morning, I wanted to but did not kiss my boyfriend goodbye in front of the workmen who were fixing our windows. I decided that any resultant social awkwardness would fall on Greg rather than on me, which didn’t seem fair. When Greg and I joined two friends for dinner at Sessanta Ristorante one night, I wanted to go over and reintroduce myself to the editor in chief of a magazine I’d written for, but to do so seemed disruptive to both my table and the editor’s.That said, the yes possibilities that were fate-derived rather than me-derived included my sweetest and my most complicated accomplishments. For Thanksgiving, Greg and I went up to southern Connecticut, to the home of my brother, Fred, and his wife, Jocelyn. An hour or so after the meal, my music-obsessed brother thrust a guitar into my hand and encouraged me to play and sing in front of the other guests, who were doing the dishes. I’ve done this about nine times in my life; I play and sing with a 45 to 75 percent mastery of any given song, which can scare the horses. But suddenly, Fred and I were warbling and plucking out Irving Berlin’s “What’ll I Do” and Loudon Wainwright III’s “Swimming Song.” I’d forgotten how good it feels to talk to my brother in his lingua franca.An hour later, Fred asked me if I would like to inherit the hulking mahogany sideboard that has been in my family for three generations when he and my sister-in-law sell their house sometime in the next year. The one that won’t fit in my apartment; the one that has a broken leg and that no one else in the family wants; the one that will incur either a $700 a year storage fee or a complicated relationship with a friend who will take it as a negotiable perma-loan. Yes?In the end, I’m pleased by the results. The physical pain from the inversion table and butoh quickly lapsed. I’ve exchanged emails with the novelist and the editor; the editor gave me a 606-page history of Rome. I may or may not feel more comfortable about eating cephalopods alone in storage areas. But on the plus side, I’ve inherited a family heirloom (Yes!), rekindled with my brother and made a friend. (Camilla and I chatted up a butoh classmate, with whom I’ve since dined.) All in all, fairly tight.Like an analysand who blurts out a secret in the last 30 seconds of his session because he’s embarrassed to talk about it, I will now reveal the hands-down weirdest yes that I accomplished. A favorite activity of Ms. Rhimes’s before her weight loss, it’s something I neither aspire to nor fear, but its utter bizarreness requires my scrutiny. “Veal practice,” as Ms. Rhimes wrote, “involved me lying very still on the sofa trying as hard as I could to mimic the life of a veal. While eating veal.” Girl, I’d love to tell you about the night I got busy with scaloppine, but I see that our time is up.Advertisement