https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/19/us/politics/pennsylvania-women.html
These 7 Women Could Help Democrats Win Congress. (And Here’s How the Republicans Plan to Stop Them.) - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2626
AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberIn a year notable for a wave of female candidates, Tuesday’s congressional primaries delivered big wins for women, particularly on the Democratic side. And nowhere was the enthusiasm more evident than in Pennsylvania, where at least seven Democratic women surged to primary victories this week, in districts that could help their party flip at least three House seats in November.A victory by any of them would be a pivotal moment for Pennsylvania, which has had an all-male congressional delegation since 2015. But some face steep battles, and politics these days offers few guarantees.“Several of them face a huge challenge because of the nature of the district,” said Terry Madonna, the director of the Center for Politics and Public Affairs at Franklin & Marshall College in Lancaster. “The Democratic wave would have to be beyond huge.”On the Republican side, one woman, Pearl Kim, will be running for a House seat in the general election.Here are the seven Democratic women who won House primaries in Pennsylvania this week:Ms. Scanlon won in the Fifth District, which is largely in Delaware County, home to the educated suburban women whom presidential candidates have traditionally seen as crucial swing voters. She will run against Ms. Kim, who was uncontested in the Republican primary.“I think voters really did show that they want to see women go to Congress. We saw that throughout the Philadelphia region,” said Ms. Scanlon, who runs the pro bono practice at a large Philadelphia law firm and has been particularly involved in defending the rights of immigrants against complaints of overaggressive policing in the state. “They want to see change in D.C., and it seems pretty clear they want to see people check back against the excesses of the Trump administration.”[There are more than 400 women running for the House this year. Read about them here.]And here’s how the Republicans will try to win the seat: This House race is the only one in the state that will have two women, so neither can use gender as a trump card in the general election. The area was formerly represented by Patrick Meehan, a Republican, who resigned amid an ethics inquiry and a sexual misconduct allegation.The newly redrawn district favors Democrats — Hillary Clinton beat Mr. Trump there with 63 percent of the vote — but even they acknowledge that Republicans were smart to nominate a woman. They say Ms. Kim has a powerful story, as the daughter of immigrants who has worked as a prosecutor and deputy attorney general to fight human trafficking.“The Republican strategy will be to run against Trump, to talk about the president and his agenda and why it’s bad,” Mr. Madonna said.Ms. Wild won a competitive primary, beating candidates to her left and right in the Seventh District. She had the support of Emily’s List, a national organization that backs female Democratic candidates who support abortion rights, as well as party officials, many of whom viewed her as the best shot at flipping the seat formerly held by Representative Charlie Dent, a Republican.In an interview on Wednesday, she celebrated the enthusiasm that helped propel so many women in the state to victory. “It’s obviously been a long time coming,” she said. “I was at the polls most of the day, and I did note a steady stream of female voters — there were plenty of male voters, too — but just a steady stream,” she said. “I think it really was important across the state and certainly in this district.”[Half of the women running in House primaries have won so far.]And here’s how the Republicans will try to win the seat: Ms. Wild will face Marty Nothstein, an Olympic cycling champion who calls himself a “principled conservative.” Republicans plan to pour money into television advertising to try to keep the area in their party’s hands, and Mr. Nothstein is likely to make direct appeals to the many blue-collar and socially conservative voters in the region.“That’s going to be much more of a competitive seat,” Mr. Madonna said. “I think it’s going to occupy a major amount of attention.”Ms. Boser won the primary in the 15th District, in the western part of the state. She said she was teaching a night class on Tuesday as votes were being counted, and then woke up early on Wednesday to finish grading papers.A professor of sociology at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, Ms. Boser spent years studying public policy, but she said her dismay over the election of President Trump drove her to get more involved in politics.“I’ve not done anything like this before,” she said. “I thought, well, I’ve been telling my students for years about getting involved and always saying to them, ‘If not you, then who?’”And here’s how the Republicans will try to win the seat: The district is solidly Republican, and Ms. Boser will be facing an incumbent, Glenn Thompson, who ran unopposed. Mr. Thompson will have name recognition and the benefit of broad Republican support.So Ms. Boser faces long odds: Even a huge Democratic wave in November may not be enough to beat a Republican incumbent in this district.Ms. King ran unopposed in the 11th District but will face long odds heading into the general election: Her district, a largely working-class region in the southern part of the state, is solidly Republican.“It is a tough battle,” she said in an interview. A nonprofit leader and a Mennonite — her husband is a Mennonite pastor — Ms. King supports progressive ideas including Medicare for all and debt-free public college. She was endorsed by Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont.And here’s how the Republicans will try to win the seat:  Ms. King is running against an incumbent, Lloyd K. Smucker, in an area that saw Mr. Trump win 61 percent of the vote. It likely will not take much for Republicans to keep the seat under their control.Ms. Houlahan ran unopposed in the Sixth District and looks to have a relatively direct path to winning a House seat. Her district is one of several around Philadelphia that voted for a woman. And she is one of the few candidates to be endorsed by former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.But Ms. Houlahan, an Air Force veteran, is not declaring victory yet. “We’re fundamentally a very purple people here in the sixth congressional,” she said. “I take exactly nothing for granted on how the results will unfold.”Ms. Houlahan said she is more of a moderate on issues relating to the economy and business. But she shies away from using traditional labels to describe herself.“I think that there is this false narrative of what it is to be a Democrat and what it is to be a Republican,” she said. “I think you can have both thoughts in your brain at the same time.”And here’s how the Republicans will try to win the seat: Mrs. Clinton won there by 10 percentage points in 2016, and the district tilts Democratic.Greg McCauley, who ran unopposed in the Republican primary, says on his campaign website that he “will be an outspoken advocate of the conservative Republican ideology — a balanced budget and smaller government.”Bibiana Boerio won the primary in the 14th District, which is tricky terrain for the Democrats: Parts of it are currently represented by Conor Lamb, a Democrat who won a special election in March, but the new district boundaries have moved him to another district.That means the area, which President Trump won by 29 points, is up for grabs in November. Ms. Boerio will compete against Guy Reschenthaler, a state senator and a Navy veteran.Ms. Boerio, a former auto industry executive, was careful not to mention Mr. Trump in an interview, focusing on her working-class roots and “the importance of civility in getting things done.”“You don’t need to scream and shout,” she said. “In fact, screaming and shouting and whatever is counterproductive.”And here’s how the Republicans will try to win the seat: This redrawn district is now more of a Republican stronghold, and Mr. Reschenthaler, 35, is one of the party’s up-and-comers. His website plays up his conservative bona fides, highlighting his opposition to sanctuary cities, high taxes and “extreme liberals.”State Representative Madeleine Dean ran away with the Democratic nomination in the Fourth District, winning more than 70 percent of the vote in a primary that was expected to be closer. She defeated another woman, the gun control activist Shira Goodman, as well as former Representative Joe Hoeffel.Ms. Dean said she was excited at the prospect of representing Montgomery County, which the redrawn map united for the first time in decades. It is Pennsylvania’s third-most populous county, but until this year, pieces of it were in five districts, none represented by a resident of the county.A fellow state representative, Mary Jo Daley, dropped out of the primary a few weeks ago and began campaigning for Ms. Dean. And Allyson Schwartz, the last woman to represent the area in Congress, also pitched in. “It just felt like women working with other women,” Ms. Dean said in an interview.And here’s how the Republicans will try to win the seat:  Dan David, a businessman, was uncontested in the Republican primary, but he will have a hard time winning in a solidly Democratic district. Mrs. Clinton won there by 19 percentage points.“I don’t think any way you look at that you can reach any conclusion but that that’s likely to be a Democratic seat,” Mr. Madonna said.Maggie Astor, Liam Stack and Kate Zernike contributed reporting.Advertisement