https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/26/arts/tekashi-6ix9ine-sentencing-probation.html
Rapper 6ix9ine Sentenced to Probation in Sex Video Case - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1238
AdvertisementSupported byBy Colin MoynihanSaying that the rapper Daniel Hernandez had “engaged in acts of unsolicited generosity” and “expressed genuine remorse for his actions,” a justice on Friday spared him from prison in connection with sexually explicit videos he made with an underage girl.Instead the justice, Felicia Mennin of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, sentenced Mr. Hernandez, who performs as Tekashi69 or 6ix9ine, to four years of probation and 1,000 hours of community service.In 2015, Mr. Hernandez admitted to taking part in making and disseminating the videos, which featured a 13-year-old girl having sex. (A man who had sex with the girl in the videos went to prison.) He received probation as part of a plea agreement, but prosecutors contended he had violated the agreement with two subsequent arrests. They had asked Justice Mennin to send him to prison for one to three years.Mr. Hernandez, 22, with his long purple, orange and yellow hair and prominent face tattoos, is among the most recognizable of rappers. One of his singles, “Fefe,” recorded with Nicki Minaj, peaked at No. 3 on Billboard Hot 100 chart. Collectively his songs have been viewed hundreds of millions of times on YouTube. He has also become known for feuds with other rappers, including YG and Chief Keef.Before his sentencing Mr. Hernandez, wearing a gray suit and a blue tie with orange stripes, addressed the court, listing occasions on which he had given to the needy and seeking to draw a distinction between himself and the profane, rule-breaking image he cultivated as a rapper.“I am Daniel Hernandez,” he said. “To the court I’m Tekashi69.”Prosecutors argued that the two were not so distinct. Mr. Hernandez was charged with misdemeanor assault in Houston this year after a teenager told the police that Mr. Hernandez had grabbed him by the neck and began yelling at him to erase a video he had recorded.He also was arrested in May in Brooklyn on a charge of driving with a suspended license. The police said that he injured an officer’s hand while in custody, so he was also charged with obstructing governmental administration and assault. That case and the Houston case are pending.Prosecutors sent a blistering memorandum to Justice Mennin saying that Mr. Hernandez had been given “every chance to succeed” but had failed to mature into the law-abiding adult that the plea agreement had anticipated.“He has instead been arrested multiple times for crimes he committed this year,” the memorandum said. “Defendant has exacerbated his own violent conduct by using his public platform and significant following to provoke and promote incidents of gun violence.”The memorandum went on to say that Mr. Hernandez had acknowledged being a member of the 9 Trey Bloods, a violent gang, and had used online “trolling” to increase record sales and “to start feuds or ‘beefs’ with other recording artists throughout the country.”For instance, prosecutors wrote, after a boxing match in April at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, Mr. Hernandez and his entourage got into an argument with another rapper, Casanova. An associate of Mr. Hernandez then removed a gun from his shoe and fired a shot, the memorandum said.The memorandum also noted that Mr. Hernandez had been the victim of a violent robbery at gunpoint in July, but that after he gave an initial interview to detectives, he refused to assist their investigation. He missed a court appearance on July 25, saying he was suffering the effects of a concussion from the robbery.“Despite this assertion, defendant attended nightclubs every night from July 23 through July 25,” prosecutors wrote, adding that an Instagram video on July 28 “shows him walking off a plane in Miami, Florida, and picking up a loaded assault rifle.”Mr. Hernandez’s lawyer, Lance Lazzaro, said his client denied breaking any laws. In any event, Mr. Lazzaro argued, the arrests did not violate the 2015 plea agreement, which called for Mr. Hernandez to stay out of trouble for two years. Prosecutors countered that the plea agreement had been extended to give Mr. Hernandez more time to satisfy all of its conditions, including obtaining a G.E.D.Mr. Lazzarro told the justice that Mr. Hernandez had donated $50,000 to a school in Bushwick to be used for snacks and field trips, and had provided meals and money to the “less fortunate.” During his statement to the court, Mr. Hernandez described giving out money in Brooklyn, Chicago, Mexico and the Dominican Republic.Justice Mennin said that although prosecutors had accused Mr. Hernandez of being part of a gang, he had not been charged with any gang-related activities. And she said that the incident in Houston may have involved “push back against an amateur paparazzi.”She also said that Mr. Hernandez’s “exaggerated overblown public persona” was well known to prosecutors when they made the plea agreement, adding, “You can’t punish people for the way they choose to market themselves.”Advertisement