http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/22/learning/40-intriguing-photos-to-make-students-think.html
40 Intriguing Photos to Make Students Think - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2552
AdvertisementSupported byWhat’s Going On in This Picture?40 PhotosView Slide Show ›By Michael GoncharAfter combing through four years of images from our popular What’s Going On in This Picture? feature, we selected 40 photographs to highlight in this slide show. Many of these are our most commented-on images — some attracting nearly a thousand student comments. Others are simply our favorites.We invite teachers and students to use this bank of 40 intriguing images, all stripped of their captions or context, to practice visual thinking and close reading skills by holding a “What’s Going On in This Picture?” discussion or writing activity.Or, use any of the ideas we suggest in this lesson plan on using our new Picture Prompt feature and other Times images to get students writing, thinking, speaking and listening._________We started this feature during the 2012-13 school year with the simple idea of taking interesting photos from The Times and asking students to look closely and describe what they see. We partnered with the arts education organization Visual Thinking Strategies to provide live moderation on Mondays and to use their powerful three-question protocol:• What is going on in this picture?• What do you see that makes you say that?• What more can you find?With that foundation, we invited classrooms and students to join the conversation. And thousands upon thousands have, from all over the country and around the world.Teachers in all sorts of settings have told us how powerful this feature is for engaging students — getting them to look closely, back up their observations with evidence and weigh what their peers are noticing.Jennifer Bradley, a science teacher at Bentonville High School in Arkansas, told us, “I started to see my students get much better at using evidence in their writing. For example, in their lab reports, they started to be much more detailed and to explain the context clues that led them to a conclusion.”Other educators agreed.“The pictures were a way for me to teach my students how to think,” wrote Andy, who teaches special education students. “We would take the picture, analyze and evaluate what we saw and create a story about what was going on in the picture. My students were able to perform this task flawlessly!”Julia wrote about her adult education E.L.L. class: “They are great conversation starters to get my class speaking in English. It also brings up new vocabulary words. Students often use their personal knowledge of the world to figure out what is happening in the photos.”If you have something to share about how you use this feature with your students, or if you have a favorite photo from the past four years that we didn’t include, let us know in the comments section.Advertisement