http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/us/politics/alicia-machado-donald-trump.html
Shamed and Angry: Alicia Machado, a Miss Universe Mocked by Donald Trump - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2682
AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Barbaro and Megan TwoheyFor 20 years, Alicia Machado has lived with the agony of what Donald J. Trump did to her after she won the Miss Universe title: shame her, over and over, for gaining weight.Private scolding was apparently insufficient. Mr. Trump, who was an executive producer of the pageant, insisted on accompanying Ms. Machado, then a teenager, to a gym, where dozens of reporters and cameramen watched as she exercised.Mr. Trump, in his trademark suit and tie, posed for photographs beside her as she burned calories in front of members of the news media. “This is somebody who likes to eat,” Mr. Trump said from inside the gym.On Monday night, Hillary Clinton turned Ms. Machado’s pain into a potent political weapon on the biggest stage.In the process, Ms. Clinton, the first female presidential nominee of a major party, elevated a largely forgotten tale of Mr. Trump, when his oversight of beauty pageants collided with his unforgiving fixation with female beauty.And Mrs. Clinton put a spotlight on Ms. Machado, Miss Universe 1996, who says she has never recovered from the experience. Ms. Machado, who grew up in Venezuela, said she had had eating disorders and psychological trauma as a result of the episode.“I was sick — anorexia and bulimia for five years,” she said in an interview with The New York Times in May. “I was 18. My personality wasn’t created yet. I was just a girl.”Mr. Trump has acknowledged pressuring her to lose weight, saying it was her job as Miss Universe to remain in peak physical shape. On Tuesday morning, he made no apologies for that.“She gained a massive amount of weight, and it was a real problem,” he told Fox News.On the debate stage, Mrs. Clinton seized on his conduct. At the end of Monday night’s 90-minute confrontation, she reminded viewers of Mr. Trump’s frequently crude remarks about women and their bodies.“One of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest. He loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them,” Mrs. Clinton said as she slowly unfurled the story.“And he called this woman ‘Miss Piggy.’ Then he called her ‘Miss Housekeeping,’ because she was Latina.”Mrs. Clinton paused.“Donald, she has a name: Her name is Alicia Machado.”Mr. Trump, clearly furious, interrupted.“Where did you find this? Where did you find this?”Mrs. Clinton concluded with a kicker looking to Election Day.“She has become a U.S. citizen, and you can bet she’s going to vote this November.”Ms. Machado, in a series of interviews this year with The Times, recalled the experience and its long-term effect on her life for an article about how Mr. Trump treats women.By her account, she gained about 12 pounds after becoming Miss Universe. Mr. Trump was not pleased. He said she had gained even more.Ms. Machado recalled the taunts from Mr. Trump that Mrs. Clinton invoked on Monday night, as well as another sobriquet: “Miss Eating Machine.”Now, Ms. Machado is an avid supporter of Mrs. Clinton. She appeared in an ad criticizing Mr. Trump. Since her setback in 1996, her career has blossomed. She is now a well-known actress in Latin America.But the scar, she said, still remains.“Over the past 20 years,” Ms. Machado said, “I’ve gone to a lot of psychologists to combat this.”Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.Advertisement