https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/16/magazine/the-dizzying-circular-logic-of-donald-trump.html
The Dizzying Circular Logic of Donald Trump - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
308
AdvertisementSupported byNotebookBy Mark LeibovichShortly before Tuesday night’s Republican debate, Showtime announced it would be starting a new political documentary series in January called “The Circus.” The creation of the Republican media consultant Mark McKinnon and the Bloomberg political journalists Mark Halperin and John Heilemann, the show will chronicle the presidential campaign as it unfolds behind the scenes. It is the latest event horizon in the history of campaigns being covered as reality-show entertainment pieces — the next logical look into the fun-house mirror of our meta-driven political culture.David Nevins, president of Showtime, envisions “The Circus” as a campaign analogue to the network’s “A Season With” series, which goes behind the scenes with sports teams as they progress through their seasons. (The current edition follows the Notre Dame football team.) The whole idea is almost too perfectly teed up for a complaint about the process-oriented way in which campaigns are covered now, the “horse race” that the various operatives, journalists, miscellaneous insiders and coat-holders obsess over.It’s not exactly a new grievance: that coverage of campaigns focuses less and less on what candidates actually say and believe than on how they’re doing. And yet Donald Trump’s hammerlock on the Republican nomination race for six solid months has pushed this phenomenon into genuinely new territory, into vistas of meta-ness that are breathtaking even to a wizened observer of these matters. Trump’s endurance is a testimonial to a campaign — and a candidate — that is defined almost entirely by the process it is dominating. Trump wins news cycles, not arguments. He wields the power of his horse-race prowess, not any viable ideas (ideas?). He kills at the box office. He drives the narrative. What else is there? Trump’s campaign is all about — the about.The apotheosis of this (non)idea in Tuesday night’s debate occurred when Jeb Bush accused the blustery billionaire of being a less-than-serious candidate and trying to “insult his way to the White House.” Trump replied, “I know you’re trying to build up your energy, Jeb,” echoing his previous dismissal of Bush as having “low energy.” “But it’s not working very well. … I’m at 42, and you’re at three.”Burn. This is the circular logic that Trump likes to twirl like a lasso whenever challenged by another candidate: America never wins anymore, but Trump always wins. Therefore he must be right, and is right (and winning) again. So shut up, little man!Trump touting his poll numbers has become such a familiar boast/weapon that it’s easy to forget what a weirdly novel innovation in campaign rhetoric it is. Did any previous presidential candidate ever bring up his poll numbers at a debate? I can’t recall any. Polls were best left to the pundits and operatives. They were process matters. Candidates debated, if not always about issues, certainly about the qualities that made them fit for the job. It is as if Trump has been aiming for these shallow polling snapshots to become self-fulfilling — and who’s to say it’s not working?“Doesn’t matter, doesn’t matter,” Bush muttered in response to Trump. That was another retro assumption, or wish, from Bush: Polls don’t matter, or if they do, they’re to be dismissed. (“The only poll that matters,” goes the cliché, “is on Election Day.”) Jeb’s brother and dad never talked about polls in public, certainly not from a debate stage. That was dirty operative stuff.In a sense, we have now moved beyond a mere obsession with process and into a stage of advanced metaness. If the only thing that matters in America is winning, then shouldn’t the only question that matters — in an election, in a debate — be simply: “Who is winning?” That would seem to be Trump’s belief, and it is perfectly suited to the immediate-gratification jones of a twitchy electorate. There is no reason to wait all the way until Election Day when you can have a reality-TV show about that election every week, starring an actual reality-TV star.I won’t pretend to be one of those solemn policy sleepy-eyes and bemoan the focus on the candy and the theater. I’m as captivated by reality TV as the next zombie. But it is worth taking some inventory of how far into the looking glass our heads are at this point.Not long after the Bush-Trump contretemps, Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz engaged in a back and forth of their own about domestic surveillance and personal privacy. It was an impressive volley about the nuances of their respective records, and it was a good moment for both, I thought — until Chris Christie felt the need to jump in and keep it real on behalf of any bored Americans out there. “I want to talk to the audience at home for a second,” Christie said — finally, someone looking after us! “If your eyes are glazed over like mine,” he went on, “this is what it’s like to be on the floor of the United States Senate.”At which point, I went on Twitter for updates on another hot matter being debated: Who was that who kept coughing in the background?Mark Leibovich is the chief national correspondent for the magazine. He profiled Donald Trump in September.Advertisement