https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/dining/annisa-west-village-restaurant-close.html
Annisa, a West Village Standout, Will Close - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2126
AdvertisementSupported byBy Tejal RaoThe acclaimed West Village restaurant Annisa, a showcase for the innovative chef and restaurateur Anita Lo, will close in May after 17 years in business.Ms. Lo said Thursday that her real estate taxes had gone up by $80,000 in the last two years, at least doubling. That increase and the rising minimum wage, which she nonetheless believes is an important step forward for the restaurant business, have made it impossible for her to keep up with costs, she said.“I always wanted to have a restaurant that takes care of its employees, and I felt like we did that for many years,” Ms. Lo said, sitting in the restaurant on Barrow Street. “But I can’t do that anymore.”“Front-of-house staff was making three to four times what the back of the house was making,” she added, which is why she switched to a no-tipping model a year ago. But since raising menu prices, Ms. Lo said, she has lost almost a quarter of her diners each night. “We just can’t raise our prices anymore,” she said.Ms. Lo said she had no immediate plans to open another restaurant. She is writing a cookbook and is looking forward to a break.The restaurant, which was devastated by a fire in 2009 and rebuilt, received three stars from Pete Wells of The New York Times in a 2014 review. Even when packed, Mr. Wells wrote, Annisa is one of those rare, comfortable Manhattan dining rooms where people can talk to each other without shouting, and the only real distraction from dinner is the neighborhood’s nightly “canine fashion parade.”But no one goes to a restaurant to observe Airedale terriers in checkered sweaters. Ms. Lo has a distinctive style of multicultural American cooking, reflected in her menu since Annisa opened in 2000.That style is “hers, and hers alone, and the city is a more exciting place for it,” Mr. Wells wrote.Ms. Lo, 51, grew up in Michigan and received a bachelor’s degree in French from Columbia. She cooked at Bouley in the 1980s and at Chanterelle in the ’90s.In a 2010 review in The Times, Sam Sifton gave Annisa two stars and called Ms. Lo “an original gangster,” noting that she used her background as a French-trained chef who had worked in American kitchens to make brilliant dishes with ingredients from all over the world.Ms. Lo has also been a mentor to younger chefs. Several talented and adventurous New York cooks have passed through her kitchen: Sawako Okochi went on to open Shalom Japan, Sohui Kim left to open the Good Fork and Insa, Suzanne Cupps is the chef de cuisine at Untitled at the Whitney, and Edie Ugot has that position at the Spotted Pig.“I never had kids,” Ms. Lo said, “and on some level, my restaurant family really has been my family.”Annisa, 13 Barrow Street, West Village 212-741-6699, annisarestaurant.com.Advertisement