https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/02/us/politics/senate-plan-to-ease-sentencing-laws.html
Sentencing Overhaul Proposed in Senate With Bipartisan Backing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
303
AdvertisementSupported byBy Carl Hulse and Jennifer SteinhauerWASHINGTON — Months of tense and at times frustrating negotiations over the effectiveness and fairness of locking up nonviolent offenders for mandatory prison terms gave way to simple handshakes on the floor of the Senate on Wednesday morning in a bold effort to recast two decades of criminal justice policy.Senator Charles E. Grassley, a conservative Iowa Republican; Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, a veteran Democratic deal maker; and Senator Cory Booker, a New Jersey Democrat with just two years in office, accepted one last request by Mr. Booker to allow young offenders to seal their criminal records so they are not haunted by early mistakes.That final agreement led to a powerful, bipartisan group of senators on Thursday introducing a broad criminal justice measure that its authors hailed not only as the most important federal justice overhaul in a generation, but also as an example of how Congress can work when lawmakers are willing to compromise.“I felt at that time we had a rare opportunity,” Mr. Durbin said of the moment they concluded the deal on legislation that would cut mandatory prison sentences for nonviolent criminals, promote more early releases and institute programs to better prepare offenders for life outside prison. Its backers hope it will reduce the financial and societal costs of mass incarceration, which has hit minority communities particularly hard.After a legislative drive in the 1980s and 1990s to get tough on drug crime and halt the spread of crack cocaine, the new legislation is seen by supporters as an overdue corrective response to a mandatory sentencing program that has punished offenders out of proportion to their crimes, sapped resources from law enforcement and deprived communities of people who could contribute and be productive if given a chance.The key to advancing the legislation was winning the endorsement of Mr. Grassley, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee and a man who has previously expressed strong reservations about backing away from stiff sentences for repeat offenders. Mr. Durbin and Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, had sought across-the-board reductions in mandatory minimums. But they relented and instead negotiated with Mr. Grassley on an approach that reduces many set sentences for drug offenders, retains them for some violent and gun crimes, and grants judges more discretion in sentencing and assessing criminal history.“For the first time, we are cutting back many of the most severe mandatory minimums so they apply more fairly,” Mr. Grassley said. “We are bringing real reform to our prisons that give low-risk inmates the chance to return to society earlier, with better prospects.”The criminal justice push has benefited from an unusual convergence of interests in an otherwise polarized Washington, and has become a singular issue that usually warring groups have rallied around. Progressive advocacy groups have embraced the possibility of less jail time and harsh treatment of those arrested; conservatives have championed the potential savings in reducing prison populations and spending on the strained criminal justice system. President Obama is also a strong advocate of criminal justice reform and would like to see legislation enacted before he leaves office.“It brings compassion into the system,” said Mr. Booker, one of two African-American senators. He is credited by lawmakers on both sides with making a significant contribution to the legislation, particularly in regard to provisions for juveniles and provisions eliminating some racial disparities in how offenders are treated and considered for early release.The legislation proposes an extensive set of changes in federal sentencing requirements. Those changes include a reduction in mandatory minimum sentencing to five years from 10 for qualified cases and to 15 from 20 in others, and the so-called three-strike penalty is reduced to 25 years from life imprisonment.Many of the new rules could be applied retroactively, and an estimated 6,500 people now in prison would be able to petition for new sentences should the legislation become law.The legislation would also ban solitary confinement for juveniles in nearly all cases, and allow those sentenced as juveniles to seek a reduction in sentencing after 20 years.The bill would put some new mandatory minimum sentences in place for those convicted of interstate domestic violence, or of providing weapons or other material to terrorists or to certain countries. While those crimes are relatively rare, the new sentences could help secure votes from lawmakers who do not want to be seen as being soft on crime.If the authors wish to push the legislation through this year, it will require an aggressive effort and a decision by Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, to make the measure a priority. Mr. Grassley said he had to meet with the committee to determine the path forward, but the legislation could be considered by the panel this month. Full congressional consideration could also be kicked into 2016.The leadership shake-up in the House, where a similar bill is being put together, could influence the proposal’s fate, as well. Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio, whose resignation from Congress is effective at the end of October, has strongly endorsed the general concept of a sentencing overhaul, but it is unclear what the view of the new leadership team will be.Despite broad support for the legislation, the effort to work out the details slowed in the Senate, and some advocates and lawmakers worried that the negotiations would fall apart. Some tough-on-crime statements from Republican presidential candidates and a highly publicized increase in murders in cities across the country also raised fears that the effort could stall, even though it is aimed at nonviolent crimes.The Senate proposal is also silent on the issue of criminal intent, an element of mounting interest among conservatives who want sentencing eased in cases where offenders claim they did not know they were breaking the law.Leaders of advocacy groups who had pressed for the legislation expressed support for the measure, though some noted it could have gone further.“While more can be done at the federal and state levels to roll back mass incarceration in America, this is a strong effort with a realistic chance at becoming law,” said Nicole Austin-Hillery, director of the Washington office of the Brennan Center for Justice.Advertisement