https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/19/business/nissan-japan-suspends-production.html
Nissan Suspends Production in Japan Because of Flawed Inspections - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1866
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan SobleTOKYO — Nissan Motor said on Thursday that it was suspending production at all of its Japanese factories after it discovered that uncertified technicians had conducted vehicle inspections even after a previous disclosure of the practice led to a major recall.“We have done something inexcusable to everyone who trusted in our efforts to prevent a recurrence,” Hiroto Saikawa, Nissan’s chief executive, said at a news conference. “I apologize deeply.”Nissan began recalling 1.2 million vehicles from the Japanese market this month after regulators faulted it for allowing workers who lacked required credentials to certify the cars. Under Japanese rules, vehicles are required to pass a final certification before they leave the factory, to ensure they conform to specifications registered with regulators for each model.Only workers who have had special training and testing are supposed to certify vehicles, but Nissan said unqualified employees had been doing the work for the past three years. The company said it would have the recalled vehicles recertified by properly authorized technicians.No accidents or faults had been linked to the problem, according to Nissan.Despite the admonition from transportation regulators that led to that recall, Mr. Saikawa said on Thursday that the practice of using unqualified inspectors had continued at four of Nissan’s six factories in Japan. Production at all six factories would be suspended, he said, until Nissan could ensure it had enough credentialed workers to carry out the checks.About 34,000 additional vehicles received certification from unqualified inspectors after the problem was discovered, Mr. Saikawa said. They, too, are expected to be recalled.The episode is an embarrassment for Nissan and for Mr. Saikawa, who took over as sole chief executive this year after the company’s longtime leader, Carlos Ghosn, stepped aside. Mr. Ghosn remains chairman and chief executive of the Renault-Nissan alliance, the French-Japanese group of which Nissan is a part.Japanese regulators have yet to announce any penalties over the improper vehicle checks, but Nissan could face fines.The revelation of corner-cutting comes at an awkward time for Japan’s auto industry. Its reputation for quality has been battered by deadly safety problems at Takata, the airbag maker that was at the center of the largest auto safety recall in history, involving tens of millions of vehicles. Takata, whose faulty airbags have been blamed for more than a dozen deaths, declared bankruptcy in June.More recently, problems emerged at another important supplier to the industry, Kobe Steel, which admitted this month to doctoring quality reports about aluminum and other materials.Kobe Steel received some welcome news on Thursday, as a group of Japanese automakers said they did not believe materials they had purchased from the company had posed a danger to the vehicles in which they were used or to their drivers. The carmakers said that while the metal may not have been as strong as advertised, it still met their safety standards, as well as those of regulators.Regulators warned Nissan in mid-September about its practice of using unqualified workers to certify cars. The practice continued at one of its factories for a short time after that, the company said, but stopped before the recall was announced at the beginning of October.But three other factories continued to use unqualified workers even after the recall, the company said.Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter: @jonathan_soble.Advertisement