https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/24/opinion/pete-buttigieg-2020-election.html
Opinion | The Millennial Candidate - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
868
AdvertisementSupported byPete Buttigieg, a 37-year-old who entered the presidential race, deserves a hearing.By David LeonhardtOpinion ColumnistThis article is part of David Leonhardt’s newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it each weekday.“I think a lot about intergenerational justice,” Pete Buttigieg, the latest Democrat to enter the presidential race, said recently. Buttigieg is 37 years old. His generation, as he points out, has endured school shootings, post-9/11 wars, climate change, rising debts and the prospect that it will fail to earn more than its parents. Buttigieg — pronounced “BOOT-edge-edge” — doesn’t have the typical résumé of a presidential candidate. He is a successful two-term mayor of South Bend, Ind., who has never held higher office. He will need to persuade voters that he has the experience and judgment to clean up Donald Trump’s mess. But I find his candidacy intriguing. He has fully embraced the idea that the United States needs to focus on its future.As Ben White of Politico tweeted, Buttigieg “running an explicitly generational campaign as a millennial screwed by boomers who wrecked the earth and destroyed the nation’s finances is super interesting.” An Atlantic piece yesterday by Edward-Isaac Dovere ran under the headline: “Pete Buttigieg Thinks All the 2020 Democrats Are Too Old.” Buttigieg himself says in an announcement video: “We can’t look for greatness in the past. Right now, our country needs a fresh start.”No matter how Buttigieg himself fares as a candidate, I hope he forces the other candidates to address the generational inequities in American life. For more about the candidate, you can listen to him tell his life story — including a transition from Rhodes scholar to naval intelligence officer in Afghanistan — on David Axelrod’s podcast. Also: Bob Moser has profiled Buttigieg in The Washington Post Magazine, asking if he could become the first millennial president. In 2016, my colleague Frank Bruni asked if Buttigieg could become the first gay president. In Indianapolis Monthly, Adam Wren tells the story of Buttigieg impressing top Democrats. And The Washington Post’s Cathleen Decker and Chelsea Janes write that his Midwestern credentials could help the Democrats rebuild the “blue wall” that crumbled in 2016.Not good, Mr. Vice PresidentLast week, I urged Joe Biden to run for president, arguing that Democrats would benefit from a diverse field and that Biden’s experience made him unique among the potential candidates. If he ran a strong campaign and seemed right for the moment, he could be the best person to take on President Trump. If Biden didn’t run a strong campaign, he wouldn’t win the nomination anyway.Yesterday brought a reminder that Biden doesn’t have a good history of running presidential campaigns.Alexander Burns of The Times broke the news that during last year’s midterm campaign, Biden accepted $200,000 to a give a speech in Michigan during which he praised Fred Upton, a Republican House candidate locked in a rough re-election campaign. The $200,000 came from a local group with ties to Upton’s family. Biden’s comments ended up in advertisements that helped defeat the Democratic candidate. The episode seems accidental, not corrupt. Biden apparently made the comments off the cuff, motivated by Upton’s work on a bill to support cancer research. And it certainly shouldn’t be a political crime for people to praise members of the other party. But given the money Biden received, he should have been more thoughtful. Instead, he reminded a lot of Democratic voters about a problem with Hillary Clinton’s 2016 campaign: her paid speeches. Biden also offered a reminder that his previous two presidential campaigns — in 1988 and 2008 — struggled from the very start. If he runs this time, he will need to become less careless.Israel and anti-SemitismThe current Israeli government commits systematic human rights abuses. A fair amount of the criticism of that same Israeli government is tinged with anti-Semitism.I believe both of those statements are true. On this week’s episode of “The Argument” podcast, I talked about Israel with my colleague Bret Stephens and Michelle Goldberg — who very much disagree with each other. Bret also spoke with Ross Douthat about the Republican Party and the white working class. If you are not a subscriber to this newsletter, you can subscribe here. You can also join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.David Leonhardt is a former Washington bureau chief for the Times, and was the founding editor of The Upshot and head of The 2020 Project, on the future of the Times newsroom. He won the 2011 Pulitzer Prize for commentary, for columns on the financial crisis.  @DLeonhardt • Facebook Advertisement