https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/01/theater/a-year-of-mourning-steeped-in-african-tradition-leads-to-a-theater-piece.html
A Year of Mourning Steeped in African Tradition Leads to a Theater Piece - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1772
AdvertisementSupported byJanuary FestivalsBy Laura Collins-HughesKaneza Schaal was 25 when her father died of malaria in 2010. Her first impulse was to stay in New York, not fly to the funeral in Burundi, where he lived when he wasn’t in the East Village. At the time, she was working with immigrant students at a school in Chelsea, and she saw no reason to interrupt that.“I thought: ‘This is such a great way to honor my dad. I don’t really need to go back,’” Ms. Schaal, an experimental theater artist, said recently in the basement of Westbeth Artists Community in the West Village, where she was surrounded by the papyrus and gold of her new show’s set-in-progress. “I grew up in California: ‘Oh, whatever, I’ll be there in spirit.’”The African branch of her clan, with roots in Rwanda, thought otherwise. “My family was like, ‘You know, Kaneza, I think you might want to come.’ And I went, and I had to be there. I could not have not been there, and I didn’t know that.”Blending Rwandese, Burundian, Christian and Rastafarian traditions, the rites surrounding her father’s death sustained Ms. Schaal in her grief. So did the ensuing year of formal mourning, which she spent back in the United States. The experience also set her off on an artistic exploration that led to the temples and tombs of Egypt, to the Egyptian Book of the Dead and to the creation of a performance and installation piece called “Go Forth.” It will have its world premiere on Thursday and run through Jan. 12 at Westbeth as part of Performance Space 122’s Coil festival, which begins on Tuesday.“In being a part of a ritualized grieving process, I had a landscape for processing my father’s death,” said Ms. Schaal, now 30, a willowy veteran of the Wooster Group, Elevator Repair Service and other downtown troupes. “And being a part of those ceremonies got me thinking about the performances of the processes around death, in East Africa, in Burundi and Rwanda, in black communities around the world, and kind of as a society at large here in the United States.”She calls the scrolls of the Egyptian Book of the Dead “ancient performance scores,” meant as scripts for the afterlife. “Go Forth” uses seven chapters from that canon, including the one whose ritual may be the most familiar to Westerners: the weighing of the dead person’s heart against a feather.Audiences will descend underground and walk through a serpentine hallway past a funerary mural of photographs to the performance space, where burbling water sounds through the network of pipes overhead. It’s not quite an ancient Egyptian tomb, but the subterranean site goes to the core of the piece, she said. With a cast of four — Justin Hicks, William Nadylam, David Thomson and April Matthis — the show will blend live performance with film projected on a papyrus screen.When her father died, Ms. Schaal recalled, the year of mourning gave her a framework for her life and also “an imaginative landscape to exist in.”“Something about the functionality of that — having a process in which to perform your own grieving or mourning or relationship to dying — was so important in my survival,” she said. “In the U.S., somebody dies and people take a day off work and go back to work the next day.”Here are selected January performance festivals.AMERICAN DANCE PLATFORM Jan. 12-17, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea; 212-691-9740; joyce.org.AMERICAN REALNESS Thursday- Jan. 17, Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, at Pitt Street, Lower East Side; 212-598-0400; abronsartscenter.org.CIRCUS NOW: INTERNATIONAL CONTEMPORARY CIRCUS EXPOSURE Jan. 14-16, Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 LaGuardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village; 212-998-4941; nyuskirball.org.COIL Tuesday-Jan. 17, various locations; 212-352-3101; ps122.org. Coil festival tickets are also available in person at some box offices.EXPONENTIAL FESTIVAL Jan. 13-30, various Brooklyn locations; theexponentialfestival.org.PROTOTYPE: OPERA/THEATER/NOW Wednesday-Jan. 17, various locations; 212-352-3101; prototypefestival.org.UNDER THE RADARWednesday-Jan. 17, most events at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village; 212-967-7555, undertheradarfestival.com.Advertisement