https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/18/theater/john-cameron-mitchell-stars-in-hedwig-and-the-angry-inch-on-broadway.html
John Cameron Mitchell Stars in ‘Hedwig and the Angry Inch’ on Broadway - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1654
AdvertisementSupported byJohn Cameron Mitchell warms up for a rehearsal of “Hedwig and the Angry Inch,” on Broadway at the Belasco Theater. Mr. Mitchell, 51, will take over the role on Wednesday, playing Hedwig on Broadway for the first time.By Patrick HealyGhosts are all around John Cameron Mitchell, and not just those said to haunt Broadway’s Belasco Theater.There’s his ex-boyfriend Jack Steeb, dead these 10 years, who now feels like his missing half. There’s Mr. Mitchell’s father, an Army general, a source of inspiration who passed away in 2013. Then there’s the performance that filled up the Belasco last year: the Tony Award-winning star turn by Neil Patrick Harris in Mr. Mitchell’s hit musical, “Hedwig and the Angry Inch.”Most of all there is the old girl herself, Hedwig, who Mr. Mitchell seared into memories when he created the “internationally ignored song stylist” at downtown clubs in the 1990s and in a 2001 movie. A worn-out blond wig for Hedwig sits on a shelf at the Belasco, where Mr. Mitchell, 51, will take over the role on Wednesday, playing her on Broadway for the first time.Closing his eyes as he warmed up before rehearsal this month, Mr. Mitchell tried to quiet the ghosts, quiet what he called his “perfectionist” instinct to deliver the ultimate Hedwig in the run that he once envisioned for himself and not Mr. Harris. Now he simply wants a fresh start. He won’t be pulling that old wig down from the shelf, to paraphrase one of his songs in “Hedwig.” New tresses are being made.“I’ve only just started to realize why I want to play Hedwig now, and it’s not some stunt to sell tickets,” Mr. Mitchell said. “It’s to break up the rut that I’m in — the complacency. I’ve been in this stage since Jack died, and through my dad’s death. And going bungee jumping or sky diving isn’t going to change it.”By using Hedwig to jolt himself — seven high-intensity performances a week through March 14 — he is reckoning with the past as well as tempting fate.“Hedwig,” a 90-minute concert in which the title character tells the story of her life, culminates in a kind of nervous breakdown, after which she puts herself back together (sort of). For Mr. Mitchell, the role was so exhausting that he all but quit acting after the movie, turning to writing or directing films (“Shortbus,” “Rabbit Hole”). He has no idea what shape he’ll be in after the Broadway run, nor can he predict how the show’s cultish fans (called Hedheads) will judge him in the role again.“Rehearsals for this — I was nervous,” Mr. Mitchell said, shaking his hands as if he’d been given an electric shock, as he sat on a chenille couch in a makeshift green room underneath the stage of the Belasco. “I felt like I should’ve been perfect right away, that I should have been able to hit every note right away.“Instead I got this,” he continued, pointing to a purplish bruise under his left eye. “I was thrashing around rehearsing one song, and I went down to the floor, and then a mike fell on my eye. And I just tell myself: ‘You’re gonna be falling around the set. It’s O.K. It’s rock ‘n’ roll.’ ”Beloved performers regularly return to characters they made famous on Broadway: Carol Channing did it (over and over again) in “Hello, Dolly!,” while more recently Nathan Lane revisited “The Producers,” as did Anthony Rapp and Adam Pascal in “Rent.” But Mr. Mitchell’s relationship with Hedwig is more complex.He created the character by drawing on his own life: The original piece, developed at the punk drag club Squeezebox, focused on the character of Tommy, a general’s son (like Mr. Mitchell) who had a German babysitter (inspired by a woman who cared for the Mitchell family in Kansas).Mr. Mitchell and his collaborator, the show’s composer and lyricist Stephen Trask, decided to focus on the babysitter, creating a back story in which she grew up as Hansel, a “slip of a girly-boy” in East Berlin, and underwent a sex change — which was botched — to become Hedwig and marry a soldier who would take her to America. Abandoned there in Kansas, the transgender Hedwig met Tommy, like her an aspiring musician, whom she came to see as her soul mate. But Tommy ended up stealing her music, leaving Hedwig deeply embittered.Among those working with Mr. Mitchell on “Hedwig” was Mr. Steeb, a bassist. They were a couple for six years before breaking up, in part because of Mr. Steeb’s struggle with addiction. He died at 36 in 2004 but remains a powerful force in Mr. Mitchell’s memory.“In a weird way he has become Tommy for me, which has made doing the show now almost emotionally harrowing at times,” said Mr. Mitchell, who seems well equipped to handle it. (His favorite playwrights are Beckett and Pinter.) “Loss has been a kind of determining event in my life. Doing the role now feels a little bit of a monument to Jack. I think my Hedwig will have more ragged edges, more punk than in past performances.”Playing Hedwig again was far from Mr. Mitchell’s mind for a few years after Mr. Steeb’s death, until he donned a wig again in 2007, when he and Mr. Trask performed songs during a concert in Seoul, where the musical has long been popular. The two men began talking about doing a “Hedwig” concert in New York. “I thought it would be the two of us for a night in Marie’s Crisis,” Mr. Trask said, referring to a small piano bar in the West Village.The idea grew into a possible Broadway production. Yet Mr. Mitchell was adamant that he didn’t want a long run, though he would do a few shows a week if producers could find another actor to do the rest.“I tested the waters with investors back then, and there definitely would have been money to bring the show to Broadway with John,” said David Binder, a theater producer who has been involved with “Hedwig” since its early days and has mounted the current Broadway revival. “But we couldn’t get other stars to split the weeks with them. They were like, ‘Who wants to be compared to John week after week?’ ”Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Binder then considered other stars to do the role full-time, quickly agreeing on Mr. Harris and to wait for his availability. Mr. Mitchell said it did not sting to watch Mr. Harris in the role — or win the Tony.“There were times I missed the character, missed performing with the band, but I also knew I couldn’t do several months of performances,” said Mr. Mitchell, who is now fortifying himself with multiple small meals a day, like the blend of Siggi’s yogurt, cocoa nibs and chia seeds that he ate before rehearsal recently.Hedwig was also on his mind because he and Mr. Trask have been at work on a sequel: a play with songs about Hedwig today, featuring other actors playing familiar characters like Yitzhak (Hedwig’s husband), Phyllis Stein (his manager), his parents and Tommy, as well as new ones. The sequel is delayed for now while Mr. Mitchell focuses on “Hedwig.”“I decided that if I was ever going to do this musical again in New York, now was the time,” Mr. Mitchell said of the show, which won both critical acclaim and the Tony last year for best musical revival.Mr. Mitchell has restored material from the original downtown run: “I’ve earned a right to feel nothing; I had to have my heart removed to fit in this dress. Suddenly I’m a perfect sample size.” He’s also playing around with new lines like: “What does my day look like, Yitzhak? I believe I have a number of appointments and an even greater number of disappointments. What time is my first disappointment?”Such hard-bitten material is in line with Mr. Mitchell’s take on the role, which was always more of a sneer of defiance at the audience than the crowd-pleasing that the constitutionally ingratiating Mr. Harris sometimes engaged in.“The world-weariness of Hedwig, the darkness of Hedwig, it’s all in John’s skin and in his blood in a way that is not possible for anyone else to inhabit in the same deep way,” said Michael Mayer, the musical’s director. “Daniel Day-Lewis couldn’t do it. Meryl Streep couldn’t do it.”Mr. Binder said ticket sales have been “really wonderful” for the coming run, though he declined to provide an amount. The show has been a profit maker since July, when it recouped its $5 million capitalization. Mr. Binder said there was a “very good chance” that Mr. Mitchell would stay in the show beyond March 14; whenever he does leave, Mr. Binder plans to recast again. (Andrew Rannells and Michael C. Hall have played Hedwig since Mr. Harris departed.)Transforming himself back into Hedwig hasn’t been a sentimental affair — Mr. Mitchell isn’t that type — but she has stirred up memories. While putting on makeup before rehearsal, Mr. Mitchell pointed to himself in a mirror and lamented his faint eyebrows.“You shaved them off for the movie, and they never grew back right,” he said, needling his longtime stylist, Mike Potter.“Lana Turner didn’t have any eyebrows,” responded Mr. Potter.“Are you trying to comfort me or insult me?” Mr. Mitchell said, pouting. Mr. Potter just kept working.On a shelf nearby was the old Farrah Fawcett-style wig, a good two feet long. Mr. Mitchell eyed it like an old ally.“That’s what I want,” Mr. Mitchell said of the tightly flared curls on the old wig. “They Belasco-sized the wigs for Neil’s bone structure.”“We’ll get there,” Mr. Potter muttered.“You’ve got to get it small for my pinhead,” Mr. Mitchell said.“It’s not a pinhead. It’s like a bird. A sparrow.”Mr. Mitchell scowled. His pointed nose and delicate features have surely been described as birdlike to him one too many times. Mr. Potter recalibrated.“It’s like Edith Piaf,” he announced.At that, finally, Mr. Mitchell smiled, and headed to the Belasco stage. By then the ghost light had been removed. The band was ready. And dressed in a black slip, gold boots and new wig, Mr. Mitchell began to sing.videoAdvertisement