https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/16/style/tiny-modern-love-stories-sex-cures-everything.html
Tiny Love Stories: ‘Sex Cures Everything’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
775
AdvertisementSupported byMODERN LOVEModern Love in miniature, featuring reader-submitted stories of no more than 100 words.Early on, during our morning train commute, I was clutching the pole with one hand and my coffee with the other when I felt a sneeze coming on. “I’m going to sneeze!” I said, concerned for my caffeine. Seeing my distress, he whipped his hand under my nose to catch the explosion. We were both disgusted. “I just needed you to take my coffee,” I said. “Oh,” he said. “I wish I’d thought of that.” No longer the early days, now there’s a baby on the way. I’m happy I’ve found someone who’s willing to get his hands dirty. — Yasmin SabirI nervously decided to study abroad the summer after my junior year in college. Four years recovered from my struggle with anorexia. My body had healed but my mind was still at war. Italy charmed me like a lover I hadn’t expected to meet. Rome courted me on cobblestone streets. Capri caressed me with its sea. Florence spoon-fed me gelato. In a country far away, my body finally began to feel like home. I had saved my life, but Italy taught me how to savor it. — Stephanie KennedyMarried 41 years: Those are not stars in our eyes, just light reflecting in our glasses. When you’re young, you fight over children or money, but sex cures everything, and the future is far away. As you age, you fight over truly listening to each other, and the future has parked in your driveway. You take advantage, but you also learn to treasure each other while you’re both still here. For years, upon leaving home, Bill has asked, “Got everything?” And I’ve said, “Got you — that’s all I need.” Somewhere along the way, it became true. — Mary Ann PerriA workaholic who had been single for a long time, I got breast cancer. Survived, and realized I only live once, and should do things I really like. Started running, got tattoos and took up singing lessons. Then I met Tracy, who loves running, tattoos and singing. We’re now the running and singing tattooed couple. — Erika KatoOne day you’re swiping through an app. Next thing you know, you’re folding their socks. So this is what all the hype was about. Saying yes to each other, and also saying yes to all the mismatched socks for the rest of our lives. At least we never have cold feet. — Spencer Rose NobleSee more Tiny Love Stories at nytimes.com/modernlove.Submit yours at nytimes.com/tinylovestories.To hear Modern Love: The Podcast, subscribe on iTunes or Google Play Music. To read past Modern Love columns, click here. Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.Advertisement