https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/movies/american-honey-open-highways-free-spirits.html
‘American Honey’: Open Highways, Free Spirits - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1276
AdvertisementSupported byBy Finn CohenSeveral years ago, on one of the many road trips around the United States that served as research for her new film, “American Honey,” the English director Andrea Arnold was driving through the South learning how to dance. She ended up inadvertently following a tornado.“I would try to stop somewhere I could go dancing every single night, so I was doing two-step, Cajun two-step, blues,” Ms. Arnold said in a recent interview, explaining that her path kept taking her into areas that people were being told to avoid. “I thought, I probably need a bit of a tornado lesson.”The nearly three-hour “American Honey,” in theaters on Friday, Sept. 30, carries that sense of embracing chaos into a tale of young, anarchic rejects (mostly played by nonactors that Ms. Arnold discovered on her trips) who travel around the Midwest in a van selling magazine subscriptions in the suburbs.Since winning the Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival in May, the movie has drawn attention from critics as a sprawling addition to the director’s credits, which include “Fish Tank” (2010), a hallucinatory 2012 remake of “Wuthering Heights” and several episodes of the Amazon series “Transparent.” “American Honey” was shot last year, but its portrayal of poverty in the United States and the country’s marginalized citizens — by an English filmmaker — arrives in a year when working-class anger has helped propel a real estate magnate to the top of the Republican Party.The film is inspired by a 2007 article in The New York Times about American “mag crews,” which have been associated with violence, drug abuse and the exploitation of their young employees.Star (Sasha Lane, who had no acting experience when Ms. Arnold approached her on a beach in Florida), is a young woman who runs away from a terrible home life to join a 15-person mag crew she encounters at a Kmart. Lured by the promise of escape and attraction to the crew’s top salesman (Shia LaBeouf), she signs on with the group, and the journey takes her through a series of allegorical challenges.Aside from Ms. Lane’s breakout performance, the film is notable for the chemistry between the actors. The cast and crew traveled together for nearly three months, from Oklahoma to North Dakota, and many of the scenes on the road are shot like a documentary, mirroring the intimacy built by living in such close quarters. Add uncertainty to the mixture — Ms. Arnold did not give out scripts — and the energy becomes palpable onscreen.Seated around a table at the New York offices of A24, the distributor that released “American Honey,” five of the actors playing mag crew members recalled the experience after a night out in New York following the film’s premiere.“When they talked to me, I was like, ‘Are you sure it’s not a porno? Because I’m not down with that,’” said Raymond Coalson, 22, whom Ms. Arnold met at a county fair in West Virginia. “We didn’t know where we were going, what we were doing, who was coming; there was always new people, places.”McCaul Lombardi, 25, one of the few who had previous credits, said: “If Andrea was here right now, she’d tell you that what she was looking for was ‘the light being on’ in people. It’s not like she was like, ‘Oh, I need you guys to say this, or do this,’ because if it was happening, most people wouldn’t even listen. It was organized chaos.”Ms. Arnold explained that she had written “not terribly specific characters” and that the actors were hired based on those descriptions. “But then, because we’re casting real people, when they came, they were being themselves,” she said. “They rebelled against a lot of anything that was too controlling.”The mag crew’s rapport is a large part of the narrative. Riley Keough (“Mad Max: Fury Road” and the Starz series “The Girlfriend Experience”) plays the team’s coldly detached leader, who makes the two lowest earners fight each other each week. Ms. Arnold juxtaposes images of highways and open spaces, leafy neighborhoods and seedy motels, with drinking and drug use, set to a soundtrack of contemporary hip-hop (Kevin Gates, Juicy J) and pop (Rihanna’s “We Found Love” and Lady Antebellum’s song from which the film takes its title).To shoot scenes for the film’s other thread, Star’s evolution and her romance with Jake (Mr. LaBeouf), Ms. Arnold pulled Ms. Lane aside for extended periods, which left the remaining cast members to their own devices. Perhaps for the benefit of the onscreen chemistry (and to the film crew’s torment), the down time seems to have been a bit like “Lord of the Flies.”“I shot a porcupine with a 9-mill,” said Dakota Powers, 18, whom Ms. Arnold found in the parking lot of a nightclub in Panama City Beach, Fla., and who became the self-proclaimed ringleader of a series of superglue pranks on the cast and crew.“They superglued my hand to my face,” said Isaiah Stone, 21, whose credits include “Winter’s Bone” (2010). “I’d wake up, my hair was superglued.”Mr. Coalson remembered one of the producers, Lars Knudsen, “walking around worried — he’s like, ‘Oh God, one of them is going to die, where’d they go? What are they doing?’”In much of Ms. Arnold’s work, her eye often trains itself on small details: flower petals or tree branches scraping against windows. And “American Honey” has no shortage of images ripe with metaphor — insects trapped against windows, a ditch full of blood, a trio of monochromatic cowboys in a Cadillac.“When they showed up on the day, with their white hats and their white car, I just thought: What is that? That’s just come out of my head — it’s like out of a David Lynch film,” Ms. Arnold recalled, laughing. “It’s coming from somewhere, and I’m sure lots of people will make some kind of — I’m looking forward to seeing all the more in-depth interpretations, because they’ll probably teach me a thing or two.”Less open to interpretation is the film’s portrayal of American poverty and its effects. The opening scene takes place in a Dumpster, with Star scrounging for food, and the mag crew travels through a number of economically depressed towns and neighborhoods. Even without back stories, the film’s peripheral characters — a truck driver, an oil worker (played by an oil worker Ms. Arnold met at a Walmart in North Dakota), the neglected children of a drug addict — are fragments of poor, white America. And as transients, the fictional mag crew members themselves have no place in society.“It’s an English director, but you have the most American kids as the cast — you have America as the cast,” Mr. Lombardi said. “We were showing the youth that’s forgot about.”It’s not a political film, per se, but it is difficult not to view it as prescient. So as the surreal American election barrels tumultuously toward a conclusion, perhaps an outsider can most accurately portray the culture that produced it.“If I’m making something, it’s going to be influenced by me and what I’ve seen,” Ms. Arnold said. “It’s never going to be like a huge truth, because everyone’s truth is different. I’ve experienced America in a completely different way to anybody else, so it’s going to be my version.”Advertisement