https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/17/business/media/breitbart-news-network-plans-global-expansion.html
Breitbart News Network Plans Global Expansion - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2373
AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie KaufmanIt has been nearly two years since the conservative provocateur Andrew Breitbart died, but the online news organization that carries his name is not only continuing to wage his political battles, it is taking the war global.Breitbart News Network, a group of activist, conservative news sites — including Big Government, Big Hollywood and Big Journalism — said on Sunday evening that it was adding at least a dozen staff members as it opens operations based in Texas and London. Stephen K. Bannon, the executive chairman of Breitbart News, said that those offices were the beginning of an expansion that would add a new regional site roughly every 90 days. California, Florida, Cairo and Jerusalem have already been chosen as expansion sites, he said.Mr. Bannon said he was taking his cue from The Huffington Post, the liberal news and commentary site that has been growing rapidly overseas. He said there was an audience hungry for his brand of activist journalism. “There is a growing global anti-establishment revolt against the permanent political class at home, and the global elites that influence them, which impacts everyone from Lubbock, Tex., to London, England,” he said.The expansion is being financed by a large pool of capital that Mr. Breitbart raised from private investors, Mr. Bannon said. Although it was always the company’s plan to add staff members and offices overseas, he said the timing had been accelerated because of a desire to influence two important political battles.In London, Breitbart News Network hopes to support a nascent European Tea Party before parliamentary elections in May. In Texas, it is eager to combat an emerging “Turn Texas Blue” movement intended to improve the standing of the Democratic Party. “We look at London and Texas as two fronts in our current cultural and political war,” Mr. Bannon said.Breitbart is part of a group of online conservative news sites that have sprung up in the last five years and are reshaping political coverage of Washington. Among the more prominent ones are The Blaze, run by Glenn Beck, and The Daily Caller, founded by the former “Crossfire” host Tucker Carlson. At times Breitbart’s attack-the-enemy approach to journalism has landed the news operations in hot water. In 2010, for example, it was criticized for editing a video to make Shirley Sherrod, a former Agriculture Department official, appear to be making racist remarks about white people. The full video showed that she did not. Last year, the company republished as news a satirical false article saying that Paul Krugman, a Nobel-winning economist and a columnist for The New York Times, had filed for personal bankruptcy.Yet the site has gained currency among conservatives, especially after breaking the item about Anthony D. Weiner, then a member of Congress, sharing lewd photos of himself on Twitter. “Breitbart has become the go-to news outlet” for elected Tea Party Republicans, “when they want to share their ideas and information,” said Alexander Marlow, editor in chief of Breitbart News.Breitbart is now the 49th largest global site in the news category, according to Alexa Internet, a web traffic measurement site. Alexa also puts Breitbart’s monthly traffic ahead of The Daily Caller and RedState but behind The Blaze and the granddaddy of conservative blogs, The Drudge Report. Mr. Bannon said the operation was not quite profitable, but is lean, with only about 25 journalists, and an additional dozen or so coming on for the new sites.The London operation will be run by James Delingpole, most recently a columnist for The Daily Telegraph, whose rants against climate change orthodoxy have been big drivers of web traffic, and by Raheem Kassam, the founder of TrendingCentral.com, a London-based conservative news site for English-speaking countries. Mr. Bannon described them as “real hell fighters in the Breitbart tradition.”Advertisement