https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/24/dining/involtini-recipe.html
Traditional Italian Flavors, in a Bundle - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
647
AdvertisementSupported byCity KitchenBy David TanisMy Italian language skills are rather limited (I’m working on it), but ordering from restaurant menus in Italy is easy. Like many Americans, I’m well acquainted with the traditional dishes. (But sadly, if the waiter then tries to engage me in conversation, I can only stammer that it’s such a lovely day.)One familiar (but occasionally complex) Italian menu term is “involtini.” It usually refers to something rolled up around a savory filling. It could be eggplant slices, swordfish cut thinly, or pounded veal (or beef or pork) cutlets. The filling could be a mixture of onions, raisins and pine nuts; a blend of onions, herbs, ham and cheese; or any number of regional variations.Involtini made with meat may be simmered in a sauce, grilled or baked in a hot oven, depending on the cook’s inclination and the meat’s inherent tenderness. In the United States, Sicilian-Americans refer to involtini as “braciole,” which are most often braised in a tomato sauce.Stuffing a thin slice of meat is a frugal practice, since each piece may weigh only two or three ounces. It is a way to stretch the budget and give everyone in the family a little bit of something meaty and delicious.Everyone makes involtini in Sicily, or you can buy them ready-to-cook in any butcher shop. They’re diminutive, no bigger than an egg, really. But one or two involtini with a juicy vegetable and a green salad makes a fine meal.This version with prosciutto cotto and caciocavallo cheese is one I learned from my friend Fabrizia Lanza, who has a cooking school near Palermo. She taught me to thread the little bundles on skewers with bay leaves and bread slices, dust them with bread crumbs and bake them in a hot oven.To make involtini di carne, buy very thin veal scallops. (A butcher will be able to pound them to your specifications, about 1/8-inch thick.). Cook a finely diced red onion until softened, then combine it with minced ham, cheese, herbs and rough bread crumbs for the filling. Place a spoonful of filling on each slice and roll the meat into a little bundle. The next step is to thread the bundles on two skewers (to seal them closed and help them keep their shape), placing a bay leaf, a piece of onion and a small slice of bread between the bundles.Lastly, place the skewers on a baking sheet, daub them liberally with olive oil and sprinkle with a coating of fine bread crumbs. As the dish bakes, the bay leaf and onion will perfume the dish, and the bread bits will become crunchy, golden croutons.When they emerge from the oven smelling heavenly, call everyone to the table. Involtini per tutti!Recipe: Sicilian Involtini With Ham and CheeseFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.cookingAdvertisement