https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/magazine/the-quiet-menace-of-kelly-reichardts-feminist-westerns.html
The Quiet Menace of Kelly Reichardt’s Feminist Westerns - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1280
FeatureThrough her spare, often uncomfortably observant movies, the filmmaker tells the stories of women moving through an uneasy world.Kelly ReichardtCreditCreditJack Davison for The New York TimesSupported byBy Alice GregoryWalking through a rapidly gentrifying neighborhood of Portland, Ore., in July, Kelly Reichardt noticed a group of teenage street punks. They had dreadlocks and dogs and dirty clothing emblazoned with hand-drawn anarchy symbols. Reichardt faltered for a moment, and then crossed the street. She told me that she suspected one of them had begun shooting up on a garage roof next door to the house where she was staying. “My instinct is to call the cops,” she said. “But then it’s like, God, whose side am I on?”The scene would have played differently in one of Reichardt’s films. Her moment of hesitation would have been barely perceptible; her lines would have been cut. The camera might have lingered sympathetically on the pockmarked face of one teenager before panning back to Reichardt’s. Her reaction would have been inscrutable.Reichardt, who is 52, has made a career of silence and suggestion — of casting an attentive but unobtrusive gaze on people who can never quite seem to win. She is interested, she says, in characters “who don’t have a net, who if you sneezed on them, their world would fall apart.”Like her films, Reichardt is short and lean and soft-spoken. It is difficult not to feel brash in her company. You want to whisper, and whatever intimacy is established seems tenuous. The vibration of a cellphone is enough to break the spell. We met at the small cottage Reichardt rents for a few months each year in Portland, where she socializes with a small coterie of artists, including her occasional writing partner, the Oregon-based novelist Jon Raymond, and Todd Haynes, who has executive-produced five of her six feature films. Reichardt regularly shoots her films in this corner of the country, using the backdrop of Oregon’s conifer forests, high deserts and shabby strip malls to portray lives led on society’s outer rim. “The characters are just sort of an extension of the landscape they’re in,” Reichardt said, after we sat down to lunch at the kind of self-conscious cafe that would never appear in one of her movies. “They’re a product of the places they’re from and their troubles — their everyday troubles.”Whether set on a cooperative farm (“Night Moves,” a 2013 eco-terrorism thriller) or in a desolate parking lot (“Wendy and Lucy,” a recession-era character study), her films are all, in their own strange way, westerns. The shots are rife with the genre’s archetypal motifs — horses, trains, buttes — and the quiet stories she tells, of lonesome, seminomadic searchers struggling to maintain dignity in the face of seemingly insurmountable odds, fill the screen as forcefully as any film that John Wayne was ever in. Reichardt’s protagonists tend not to be men, however, but emotionally inarticulate women, whose problems the supposedly civilizing force of frontier justice never proves strong enough to fix.While a lone man can be a hero — readily and right from the start — a lone woman is cause for concern. Despite their painterly settings and near-silent soundscapes, Reichardt’s films are animated by a sustained unease. The viewer anticipates a threat that could but never quite does progress to a state of emergency. A car crash produces no injuries. A nocturnal encounter with intoxicated homeless men does not result in sexual violence. An old man gives every indication he could die at any moment but does not. The menace is durational and transforms the audience into participants in a kind of endurance art. It’s the low-grade but unrelenting sense of hazard that is a woman’s experience of merely moving through the world, an anxiety so quiet and constant it can be confused for nothing more than atmosphere.The daughter of a crime-scene detective and an undercover narcotics agent, Reichardt grew up in Miami, which she alternately describes as “survivors playing canasta,” a “cultural void” and “the place, from the third grade on, I fantasized about getting out of.” Thurston Moore, of Sonic Youth, who was born in the same hospital as Reichardt and spent his early years in South Miami, once told her that he saw an ad in a local paper that read, “If anyone’s ever heard of the Clash, please call me.” “That,” Reichardt said, “is the best description of the Miami I grew up in.”She dropped out of high school after 11th grade, worked in a clog shop for a while and a record store for a little longer and eventually caught a ride to Boston in the middle of winter. “I had never seen snow before, and I was there in my little Miami clothes,” Reichardt said. “In my mind it was a blizzard, but it was probably just snowing.” She arrived at a friend’s empty apartment, settled in and, as she recalls, “was sitting there pondering how my new life was going to go” when she heard a knock at the door. “There were two people there,” Reichardt says. “Now I understand the get-up, but there they were in Salvation Army granny clothes and combat boots and he had his shaved head.” She had never seen such people and couldn’t even tell how old they were. “They were like, ‘We live across the street and our freezer’s broken and we have some hamburger meat in that fridge.’ And I looked, and indeed there was hamburger meat in the fridge. And they said, ‘So you want to come have spaghetti with us?’ ”The dinner was Reichardt’s first introduction to any sort of life outside the mainstream. She began sleeping on her neighbors’ couches, attending their parties. She took night classes to get access to equipment, which she used to film their projects; the films, in turn, became her application to art school. After graduating from the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, she moved to New York City and, after a few years, began writing her first feature film, “River of Grass.”Reichardt once described “River of Grass,” which was met with positive if not career-catalyzing reviews, as “a road movie without the road, a love story without the love and a crime story without the crime.” It was released in 1994, a full 12 years before her next movie. She spent half that time couch-surfing, including a few months in Hollywood, trying and failing to get something made in a place that, as she realizes now, required skills like pitching and schmoozing that she didn’t even knew existed. “I came back to New York thinking: This is torturous. What do I even like about this?” she said. “The answer, it turned out, was: I like holding my camera. I like shooting and thinking about frames.”She went back to making short Super 8 films, mostly shot outside. “They were really not good,” she insists. Still, one made it to the Venice Film Festival. “Of course my producer and I weren’t invited to any of the parties,” she said. “So we sat on the riverbank and watched these parties that were happening on boats. It really was an epiphany. I thought, This is exactly where I want to be: not at the party but on the bank of a river, with my friend, looking on at it.”She used $30,000 she inherited from a great-aunt to make “Old Joy,” a misanthropic buddy film shot on 16-millimeter and co-starring the indie-rock musician Will Oldham. Since then, Reichardt has worked continuously, releasing a new film every two or three years. For her, this pace is an act of self-preservation. “I’m not great with the production of real life — the car, the insurance, the dentist — all those things that seem to mount up if you don’t have a project and become the meat of your day,” she told me.If Reichardt’s ineffectual years in Hollywood taught her anything, it was the value of identifying undesirable ways of working and living — and then developing the confidence to avoid them. She lives alone in a rent-stabilized apartment in New York and maintains a normal person’s sense of money. “It’s still like a house,” she says when the budgets for her pared-down productions come up. In exchange for working outside the system, she has earned the privilege of final cut. “Nobody comes into my editing room, ever,” she told me. “Art by committee is a really bad idea.”“Certain Women,” her latest film and arguably the most precise expression of Reichardt’s vision to date, is a triptych based on three short stories by the Montana-raised author Maile Meloy. It follows a small-town lawyer (Laura Dern) trying fruitlessly to convince a man injured on a contracting job that making a claim against his former employer would be hopeless; an unhappily married couple (Michelle Williams plays the wife) in the midst of harvesting sandstone for a weekend house; and a recent law-school graduate (Kristen Stewart) who becomes the object of fixation for a reclusive female ranch hand. Though each restrained vignette is connected by only a blink-and-you-miss-it narrative delicacy, an active loneliness unites the characters, whose inner desolation seems at least in part a reaction to the barren winter plains of southern Montana. Like so many of Reichardt’s protagonists, each of the women is a “figure of repose,” to quote Robert Warshow’s famous essay “The Westerner” — people whose “melancholy comes from the ‘simple’ recognition that life is unavoidably serious.”Williams, who has acted in three of Reichardt’s films, characterizes the director’s work as “38 things buried under the semblance of nothing.” When she first read the script for “Certain Women,” she thought there were pages missing. “As an actor, you cling to things like back story, what your character says and does,” Williams told me. “But silent communication is actually how we experience our lives. ... We go along all day without saying anything that you can really pin something to, nothing someone could point to and say, ‘Hey, it hurt me when you said this.’ ”Like the Dardenne brothers or the Italian Neo-Realists or a mud-encrusted Robert Altman on the set of “McCabe and Mrs. Miller,” Reichardt is devoted to showing the texture of genuine hardship. She is preoccupied with the cruelty of inattention and the rote motions that make up a person’s day. Where does someone who lives in a car brush her teeth each morning? What does someone working two jobs look like, move like at the end of the day, knowing she’s about to get up and do it all again?Reichardt, as if in solidarity with her characters, is herself made uncomfortable by comfort. She embraces a grueling production process that mimics the precarious existences she shows on-screen. When critics and cinephiles lament the demise of low-budget filmmaking, they’re almost always talking about projects that cost many times more than Reichardt’s. “Certain Women,” which was made for around $2 million, is by far her most expensive film to date. Her 2006 movie, “Old Joy,” cost $100,000; “Wendy and Lucy,” from 2008, $300,000.“You can romanticize it — and maybe it is adding something — but it also just means that I’m not getting paid, and I’m in my 50s,” she jokes. Gus Van Sant likes to remind Reichardt that with more money come new problems. “I’m sure it’s absolutely true,” she acknowledges, “but I think I’d like to try some of those other problems.”Of her many inhospitable sets, the one for “Meek’s Cutoff,” a re-enactment of an ill-fated Oregon Trail journey and Reichardt’s only “true” western, was the most hostile. There were rattlesnakes and tornado-speed winds; it was 110 degrees during the day and 20 degrees at night. Actors came down with heatstroke and hypothermia. “Google is not research,” she said. “Research is a lived thing.”Reichardt elicits unparalleled performances in part by creating conditions under which actors cannot act. Frequent appearances by animals force improvisational gestures, as does bad weather on set, which is incorporated into scenes instead of avoided through expensive scheduling changes. It was well below freezing and gray when “Certain Women” began filming in Montana last spring, and by lunch the camera crew was in tears. Nobody but the actors and a limited crew were present — no studio executives, no onlookers. “No one really wants to sit out in 18-degree weather and see what you’re doing,” Reichardt explained. “They’re hard places to get to by design, and it makes for an insular, private world.”“Certain Women” (2016).Last October, five months after filming had wrapped, I visited Reichardt at Skywalker Ranch, George Lucas’s Arcadian 6,000-acre estate in Northern California, where various rooms and buildings — sound-editing suites, mixing stages, screening rooms — are routinely rented out by Hollywood postproduction crews.With the state-of-the-art technology and all the parking lots hidden from sight, the grapevine-trellised campus looked like a wellness spa or the location of a rigorously hashtagged six-figure wedding. Guests can swim, ride bikes, drink proprietary wine and eat gourmet meals prepared with vegetables grown on the premises. She was grateful for it, but the entire setup agitated her. It was too nice.Reichardt was there to get through a few efficient days in the studio with Kent Sparling, a sound designer with whom she worked on “Night Moves.” The two had already clocked nearly 100 hours side by side in foam-padded rooms, and their rapport was one of affectionate bickering. Like everyone else who comes into contact with Reichardt, Sparling — who is known for being exacting about his work and whose credits include films as diverse as “Lost in Translation” and “The Simpsons Movie” — seemed almost careless by comparison.The rural Montana that Reichardt captured on camera six months earlier now needed to sound as subtly correct as it looked. The bird calls were a source of unyielding tension. In an attempt to muffle out a line of dialogue spoken by a child, Sparling suggested inserting some chirps. “We’ve got a little peeper bird,” he offered, while scanning his list of audio files. Reichardt asked, “Does that exist in Montana?” Sparling groaned. “Are we really going there?” Reichardt nodded. He played the clip and then said, “I think the peeper’s too quiet anyway.” They went on like this: Sparling playing warblers, Reichardt looking up online the ones she liked to see if they were regionally and seasonally appropriate. A pheasant was proposed, as was a grouse. “We’re near a river, so maybe there’s a wood duck?” Reichardt wondered aloud. Sparling played her a wood duck. The quack was boisterous, almost funny. Reichardt, perhaps the only person in the world who could find a bird call gauche, yelped. “God, no, not the duck!”Sparling, impatient, suggested a bird from Florida, and Reichardt laughed. “What was the first conversation I ever had with you?” she asked. “It was, ‘Do you care about birds?’ Wasn’t that the first question I ever asked when I met you? I’m pretty sure it was.”Slowly, slowly throughout the morning they finessed their way through seconds of footage. Tinkering with the rumble of a truck engine, Reichardt instructed: “Let’s embrace it but not embellish it.” While editing a conversation that takes place inside a car, she argued with Sparling about how best to retain both the dialogue and the sounds of the road. “Let’s get the air and the wind and the trees and the gravel and the tires and just forget about what they say,” Sparling joked punishingly. “You want your unbuttered toast buttered!” Reichardt smiled, and said, “Well, yeah, a little bit.”They continued. Noises that Reichardt turned down or cut out included a single wind chime, a barely audible breeze, the rustling of a tent. The already-quiet scene grew quieter, stiller. At one point, the sound of a tarp wrinkling was inappropriately amplified. No moviegoer would notice it, but that wasn’t the point. Despite initial adjustments, the whirring was still apparent. Reichardt asked Sparling to lower the levels again; he did, but it wasn’t enough. Reichardt looked despondent. In a signal of forfeit, she sighed, shrugged and said, “Maybe the world is just too loud.”Alice Gregory is a columnist for The New York Times Book Review and a contributing editor at T, and has written for The New Yorker, Harper’s and GQ.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. Advertisement