https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/21/opinion/the-argument-trump-new-zealand-attack.html
Opinion | Is Trump Causing White Terrorism? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
244
AdvertisementtranscriptWith Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David LeonhardtAnd what would a fair college admissions system look like?Thursday, March 21st, 2019michelle goldbergI’m Michelle Goldberg.ross douthatI’m Ross Douthat.david leonhardtI’m David Leonhardt. And this is “The Argument.” This week, is President Trump causing white supremacist terrorism or is he a red herring?jamelle bouieThis kind of violence precedes Trump.david leonhardtThen what does a fair college admission system look like?ross douthatThere were still efforts by these schools to not admit exclusively the stupidest heirs of shipping families.david leonhardtAnd finally a recommendation.michelle goldbergIt is one of the great scams of our age.david leonhardtIn an interview last week President Trump suggested that his supporters might resort to violence if they didn’t get their way. Two days later a gunman killed at least 50 people in two mosques in New Zealand and the suspected killer’s manifesto cited Trump’s friendliness to white nationalism. Today we want to talk about whether it’s fair to draw a connection between Trump and white nationalist violence. Is he part of the problem or is he a symptom of an underlying illness? To talk about this and more our colleague Jamelle Bouie is calling in from Charlottesville, Virginia. Welcome back to the show Jamelle.jamelle bouieThank you for having me.david leonhardtAnd hello Michelle and Ross.michelle goldbergHey there.ross douthatHey David.david leonhardtJamelle, how do you think about the state of the white supremacy movement right now? Do you think it’s growing? Do you think it’s always sort of out there in a small but meaningful way and it’s getting more attention right now?jamelle bouieSo I think it’s more or less kind of an ever present part of American society. It’s hard to look at any given period in American history where there has not been some kind of organized movement of white supremacists and specifically like virulent and violent white supremacists. At times they even have explicit state sanction. I think what we have to remember is that depending on the times in American history, those movements have kind of a different relationship to societies. So the second Ku Klux Klan in the late 1910s and 1920s exists more or less to bolster mainstream ideas about Americanism and the predominance of kind of a white Anglo-Saxon America. In this current iteration it is taking the kind of autonomous cell model of the ‘80s and ‘90s that shows up — Timothy McVeigh, the Oklahoma City bomber, was part of this “leaderless resistance” is the term they use — and kind of super charging that.ross douthatI mean to me, Jamelle, you know, I have conservative politics that overlaps with other people’s populist politics which in turn overlaps with some people who are sort of scarily close to some of these fringe views. And it seems to me that there’s been a big shift, mostly internet and sort of outside events-driven, in the last five or six years. I think one way to look at it which is really well illustrated in the horrifying New Zealand case is a kind of globalization of European anxiety. Where you’ve had a large trend towards immigration and cultural conflict around Islam in Europe going on for years and decades that was sort of brought to a sharp point by the Syrian refugee crisis, the rise of ISIS, the wave of ISIS-inspired bombings. Which in turn created this kind of white identitarian theory of the world that then found acolytes in North America, all the way in Australia and New Zealand. That sort of took pieces of the European experience as a normative state of global whiteness that then became an inspiration in these cases for violence. And at the same time I think it’s connected to what you might call a kind of crisis of the white Christian church in the western world where you have a lot of children who grow up in what seem like failing, culturally irrelevant forms of Christianity who often end up with a sort of contempt for Christianity but don’t turn to the left because of that. They turn to this sort of racial identity.michelle goldbergAnd then you have this nihilistic troll culture and it seems like one of the ways in which there’s no politician, as far as I know, anywhere on earth who more effectively bridges 8chan shit-posting with European replacement theory. Right? That’s Donald Trump. And so to me it’s not necessarily that I think Donald Trump has inspired this movement, but I do have to think that his success, right? The fact that if you’re going to give up your life in the service of this act of horrific mass violence it’s usually because you think that that horrific act of mass violence is going to get you closer to this grandiose goal. One of the things that Donald Trump has done is made it feel like their dreams are slightly less impossible. Right? That a basically white supremacist shitposter can become president of the United States. And so maybe this dreamed-for revolution really can happen.david leonhardtI want to home in on Trump’s role here. I mean to me it’s really clear that Trump plays a causal role in this. If you look at the rise of racism and anti-Semitism on social media. That’s the way I read the data. There is a pretty significant increase in the different data sets. Now they’re imperfect and I guess I want to see whether any of you, probably most likely Ross, disagrees with the idea — he’s not the only cause of this but the fact that we have a white nationalist as the president United States is making this stuff more common.jamelle bouieYeah I guess I think I see it in terms of to use a decent historical analogy, I see it in terms of the relationship between Andrew Johnson and kind of anti-black vigilante violence in the immediate post-Civil War period. It’s not that Andrew Johnson caused any of it but that he didn’t give a shit, right? [LAUGHS] He didn’t care much about it. At times when it happened he excused it and that was felt and heard by people on the ground. And so his indifference, his occasional sort of like complicity in it then creates an atmosphere where people willing to inflict violence decide that maybe they can get away with it. Or maybe if it’s done to send a message, that message will get some kind of amplification by a powerful political leader. And I think that’s kind of the important dynamic. I’m not sure I would attribute a causal mechanism but there is a feedback loop happening.michelle goldbergThe other piece of it is that I feel like Trump’s election has convinced these people, has convinced white nationalists, that they have much wider support than they’d realized. Right? I mean I think that most terrorists act out of a sense that they’re acting on behalf of a greater silent population. There was a poll out recently that shows that something like 19 percent of people believe that Trump opposes white nationalism. What that tells you is that a large number of his supporters believe that Trump does not, in fact, oppose white nationalism. And so again I feel like if you you’re willing to take these kind of steps, if you believe that there are people behind you, if you believe that you’re going to have some kind of support or even some sort of catalytic effect, that you’re going to spark some sort of uprising.ross douthatI think I’m closer to Jamelle’s take than Michelle’s. I think the right way to understand Trump is that yeah, he’s someone who doesn’t give a shit about white nationalism. And that the president of the United States is a powerful office with a lot of cultural influence. And that undoubtedly has toxic effects on the culture that have some kind of role in spreading these ideas, making them seem more credible and so on. I think calling Trump a white nationalist is a sort of analytic mistake. I mean we’ve had this discussion before, what counts as white nationalism? But I think it imputes a level of ideology to him that he doesn’t have. I think it’s more reasonable to call him sort of a bigot or a racist than a white nationalist. I guess I’d put it this way: I think all of these things would be happening with or without Donald Trump and I think the conversation that we had for most of this episode about the causes is much more important to the next 20 years of world history than what Trump himself is or isn’t doing. So I think it’s good and right to condemn how Trump handles this stuff and how he enables people. But I don’t think ultimately either the most extreme people acting out or the general drift is being driven that much by some idea that Donald Trump was elected and now we can build the white ethnostate. I think the dreams of the white ethnostate are responses to much broader dislocations, anxieties, transformations of which Trump is himself a kind of particularly striking epiphenomenon.david leonhardtI’m not saying Trump is causing all of this but I really don’t think that this would all be the same if Trump hadn’t run his campaign. I mean Trump has this 30-plus year history of racism right. Going back to the ads in the newspapers about the Central Park case and then he runs for office and he runs a more race-conscious and racist campaign than we’ve basically seen in our adult lifetime. And along with that we have a surge of racism and anti-Semitism online and in graffiti and as best as we can tell in the numbers in actual crimes. And so I’m not saying he’s the main cause but I just don’t think it’s enough to say that he just doesn’t care about white nationalism and that all of this would be happening if he hadn’t showed that it’s possible to go out and say these things and still be elected president.jamelle bouieI mean I guess I think that it’s tough for me to disentangle that two. Like if you’re me and you think that one of the through lines of the history of Western society from 1945 to the present is the slow motion collapse of race hierarchy, or at least a slow motion collapse of race hierarchy in its most explicit forms, and that lots of things are happening in reaction to that, then you can look at Trump, like Ross said, as an epiphenomena of that. His entire career, right? Like someone who’s casual bigotry and casual racism and acted on racism kind of just makes him a curiosity at first in national life. But as time goes on and it becomes more part of his public persona. And also it’s hard for me to say if Trump wasn’t there how much of this would be happening. The year, actually the week that Trump announced his campaign, Dylann Roof killed nine people in Charleston. Right? Sort of like this kind of violence precedes Trump. It was in planning before Trump and I feel like the most I’m willing to say about any causal relationship is just that like, Trump’s campaign, his style, his disregard, his willingness to elevate people kind of adjacent to that world, has — to borrow terminology from the last decade of politics — aid and comfort to the enemy. Right? But. I’m not sure it’s causal.david leonhardtLet’s end here. And I’d be interested in each of your thoughts quickly: how do you think this plays with the American public at this point? Trump obviously thinks it still plays well. I mean he ran the closing week of the midterm campaign basically running what I would describe as this kind of white nationalist message. How much do you think this actually helps him heading into 2020 or hurts him at this point? Jamelle?jamelle bouieIt’s always easier for me to start from like my baseline view of things. And my baseline view of things is that if Trump could somehow stop talking until November 2020 he will win re-election. Right? Like background conditions in American society are good enough that if people could just forget that Donald Trump was president he would win. Donald Trump’s problem is that he cannot stop talking, that he cannot stop reminding people that he is president and he does so in the most kind of aggressive and offensive and disheartening ways. And so to the extent that his language and rhetoric here does that, remind people of all the things they specifically dislike about President Donald Trump, it hurts him and cannot help him.david leonhardtMichelle?michelle goldbergYou know Donald Trump is a minority president, right? He was elected with a minority coalition. His re-election depends on a sort of minority rule in the United States and the perpetuation of minority rule in the United States. And so inasmuch as that’s the bet that he’s made, the way he keeps that base united, I think, is to keep giving them what they want, which is a president who will completely embrace their racial and cultural grievances and desire to spite their enemies. And so if he became a more decent man, which he can’t become, he might expand his coalition a little bit but he would lessen its intensity.ross douthatI think Michelle is right that there is a portion of Trump’s base that sort of responds to not just his comments but also sort of media attacks on his comments by ending up binding more tightly to him. But in general I’m with Jamelle. I think the only time the sort of flirtation with white nationalism stuff really helped Trump was very early in the Republican primaries when he was trying to build an initial base of support. That’s why he started out with birtherism. It helped him become a candidate with supporters. But at this point, you know, the economy is good. A different version of Trumpism that was more authentically populist on economics and was not constantly flirting with white nationalism I think would be much more electorally effective. I don’t think this stuff hurts him as much as most people who read The New York Times think it should hurt him. But I don’t think it helps him in any meaningful way.david leonhardtO.K. we’re going to leave it there and take a quick break and we will be right back to talk about the big college admissions scandal. It’s the story that bourgeois America can’t stop talking about.news clipFlurry of new indictments today ensnaring celebrities, CEOs, college coaches in a massive scheme to game the college admissions system.david leonhardtLast week federal prosecutors charged 50 people in a scheme to buy spots in elite colleges. The details were amazing bald lies about athletic prowess, a doctored photo of a football player, straight up cheating on standardized tests. The story has led many people to ask what the purpose of these elite colleges actually is and what it should be. Ross, you had a thought-provoking argument about this topic this week and I’ve been noodling over your argument ever since. So why don’t you spin it out for us so we can talk about it.ross douthatWell this is just a return to my usual theme which is that meritocracy is a failure. And I was trying to be contrarian relative to people who said well look, this shows how meritocracy is corrupted and people can buy their way into schools if they’re rich and fake SAT scores and so on. And actually I mean I think the faking of SAT scores is actually a testament to meritocracy in the sense that it turns out that the rich kids can’t get into these schools unless they literally fake having high enough SAT scores.david leonhardtThat hours of tutoring are not enough basically.ross douthatThe hours of tutoring are not enough. Right? So in that sense if all you’re concerned about is, is the system selecting for smart kids this kind of scandal should not shake your confidence in it. My question is whether it actually makes sense to have a system where you’re telling everyone all we’re doing is selecting for smart kids and that it is good that elite schools maybe have both affirmative action programs and legacy admission programs and that this is better than a world where the elite schools were sort of purely meritocratic and only admitted kids with 1600s on their SATs.michelle goldbergBut what is the possible defense of legacy admissions?ross douthatThe reason schools do it is that they want to have families and sort of intergenerational loyalties that are sort of invested in the school and the school’s success. The more radical argument is that every society has an elite and it’s not a bad thing to have elites that have a sense of stewardship and continuity and legacy admissions are not the worst way to bring that about. That you want an elite that has some continuity from generation to generation. That is obviously well outside the norm of arguments in our democratic society. But it seems to me that it might be true. I’m curious what Jamelle thinks of my strange right-wing defense of affirmative action.jamelle bouieSo this is like an area of potential convergence here because I agree that there is no real meritocracy in American society. And to the extent that there is meritocracy a kind of is like a transmission. It acts to transmit inherited advantages. So if we accept that, if we kind of buy the premise that meritocracy isn’t necessarily a great way of distributing resources like access to elite colleges — and elite colleges I’m just going to define here is not just like you’re Harvard or Yale but kind of like the highly selective schools overall. Remember with this scandal some of the kids were trying to get into USC.david leonhardtAnd I think it’s important to add public schools to it, right? I mean Jamelle you’re talking to us from Charlottesville. The University of Virginia, University of North Carolina, Michigan, Berkeley: they’re all part of this as well.jamelle bouieRight. You’ve I mean UVA — I’m a UVA grad and UVA in its conception was basically to cultivate a political and social elite for the state of Virginia. That’s what it was designed to do. If that’s what these institutions are actually doing, in addition to they’re being research institutions, they do provide education but if they also are cultivating elites, then I’m with Ross. I’d rather it be something explicit that we can have a discussion about rather than submerged under a bunch of pretense. Two things really influence my thinking here. The first is sociologist Orlando Patterson years ago had a book, “The Ordeal of Integration,” where he makes a case for affirmative action. And his case for affirmative action isn’t about merit. It’s simply about in any sufficiently elite organization what’s going to happen is that people are just going to be selecting people who are similar to them. So if we want those institutions to be more diverse, to better reflect the country, then we should just mandate that they take people who look differently. The second thing is the other big college education scandal that has happened this year and that is the T.M. Landry College Prep school scandal. It was a small private school in Louisiana, in a high poverty town. And the school’s graduates were overwhelmingly black, poor or both. And the school was sending class after class to Ivy League schools. It turns out that what it was doing is it was either falsifying grades and activities or creating kind of fake sob stories that appeal to the heartstrings of white elites who want to do a solid for a poor black kid from Louisiana. The interesting thing about this is that those kids, many of them did fine at these schools. Maybe they had a hard time for the first year but they got better and they’re doing fine. And that to me says something about the schools themselves which is that the idea that you have to score in the top echelon of anything to succeed at them is not true.michelle goldbergRight. It’s kind of being at the school that makes you succeed.jamelle bouieRight, exactly. And if that’s true then, you know, let’s drop the pretense of meritocracy then. Let’s just say, as Ross suggested, that what we’re doing here is kind of cultivating an elite. We want that elite to look like the United States, not just in terms of racial diversity but in regional diversity and religious diversity and so on so forth. And we go from there. And then we we make our decisions based off of that. Versus, again, the pretense which there are times I think pretense is actually quite important; American politics the past 20 years is one of them. But here I think we can drop it somewhat.david leonhardtThe thing I don’t completely understand though is what’s the logical extension of the argument that you’re making. So if you say, hey, these elite schools should have more regional diversity than they do, I’m with you. And the University of Texas has this great system that’s mostly worked extremely well in which they took what was originally the top 10 percent of each high school class. If you say they should be more racially diverse than they are more economically diverse, I’m with you the whole way. But then how do you pick who gets into the University of Texas or the University of Virginia or Harvard once you’ve done that. I don’t think you’re actually — either Jamelle or Ross — suggesting that we sort of have a lottery for these slots. I think we do want some meritocracy as part of the process.michelle goldbergRight, you went like a balancing of meritocracy and representation.ross douthatRight.david leonhardtYes, exactly.ross douthatBut there has always been that balance, right? Like even in the — to reference my most popular column ever — even in the old days of WASP hegemony, right, there were still efforts by these schools to not admit exclusively the stupidest heirs of shipping families, right?david leonhardtSome efforts but those efforts didn’t go that far. [LAUGHS]ross douthatBut I think people overestimate how hostile the past was to talent. Right? Of course you want an elite to be talented but you can say, if you’re an elite school we’re gonna set a minimum SAT score pegged to the average distribution of SAT scores in this ethnic group or region or whatever. So we’re going to ensure that we’re not admitting people who can’t handle the work at all. You obviously don’t get rid of some sort of bias towards merit but you assume that the system right now might be too biased towards merit. And again this is the elite level. I think there’s a larger conversation here about how Harvard and Yale have pretended that they’re in the mass opportunity game which they’re not. They’re tiny elite schools. And meanwhile the rest of American higher ed has pretended that they’re all like Harvard and Yale when in fact what we need is state schools to have a different approach, and Catholic schools to have a different approach, and historically black colleges to have a different approach. We need much more investment in community college and vocational education. But definitely this shift in how elite colleges approach things would have to go hand-in-hand with a shift in like how you know mid-level state universities handle things. And there might be a case that like certain kinds of public universities should be more meritocratic and should be, you know, only doing it based on tests, and you know that you should have a lot of different approaches.michelle goldbergI mean the one reason why sort of meritocratic ideals are so important is because they create an illusion of fairness around what’s an extremely unfair system. And so the underlying kind of structural thing here is that we have such a massively unequal society that we have this insane kind of funnel system in which we decide who deserves not just opportunity, but sort of, you know, dignity, health, a decent life. Right? And so once you start kind of saying that we’re going to allocate a healthy existence through getting into these few schools — which in many cases means kind of excelling on these standardized tests — you completely deform educational incentives starting pretty far back and then you make the stakes of this process just kind of intolerably high for everyone.jamelle bouieOne thing I want to add to this discussion: just as I think being from Virginia, having attended a public school, part of the solution here in terms of taking pressure and taking the weight off of the scramble to get in to sort of like ultra-elite schools is, in addition to having a more equal society, also having a society where opportunities are just more broadly distributed. To really succeed in a major way you have to kind of uproot yourself from your community and move to a major city, maybe even in a completely different state. It does kind of make it more important, then, to attain some kind of credential that is recognized nationally which is what a Harvard degree is or Yale degree is. But if you can get an education at Virginia Tech and then find an opportunity in Virginia or in North Carolina, things are more regional in terms of the distribution of like elites, then it kind of diffuses all of this tension.ross douthatI mean that was the American system for a long time, that you had some national elite but it was a narrow elite and there were regional elites that you could get into. And I mean I think it is still especially the case in the South. Jamelle you can correct me if I’m wrong, but my sense is that these sort of regional schools have more pull in the South than elsewhere and that on the coasts it sort of all the Ivy hierarchy that people think about.david leonhardtThis is good because I was the most cynical person in the first segment and I think I’m the least cynical person in this segment. I mean to me this is not an illusion of meritocracy it’s a highly flawed meritocracy. And I’m really glad that this scandal is pushing colleges to think more about the ways in which they’re not meritocratic. But the one way in which I think I am supremely cynical is sports. The whole reason that people were able to get these kids in is because of the ludicrously large bonuses that athletes get when applying and the huge share of students at these schools who are athletes. I mentioned this week in my email newsletter that about 20 percent of students at Williams College, an elite college in Massachusetts, are recruited athletes. It turns out I was way too conservative. It’s closer to 30 percent. Thirty percent of entering students at Williams College each year are recruited athletes, and Williams is not some massive outlier. Do you all agree with me that a system in which sports played a smaller role. I’m not saying no role but a smaller role in higher education would be healthy.michelle goldbergI would say no role no role.ross douthatI would say this, I think a world where sports played less of a role at big state schools would be better. I think there’s a lot of evidence that the effects of big time sports, big time college programs on campus culture is really toxic. I think having jocks at elite schools is fine.david leonhardtSo Ross you think the current level is is O.K.? You think having 25 or 30 percent of students at these schools be recruited athletes, many in sports that no one goes out to watch, many in sports that are overwhelmingly white and affluent, that’s O.K.?ross douthatI mean look if you’re asking would I cut it in order to have big quotas for conservative Catholics, of course. Of course I would. [GOLDBERG AND LEONHARDT LAUGH]michelle goldbergSo you know everyone knows that I am a sports hater. But instead of sort of lowering the stakes by offering more routes into these kind of elite schools, it seems to me that this sports culture just ends up kind of raising them by expecting kids to excel along all these different axes or expecting them to prove some like really fraudulent kind of well-roundedness. I feel like you talk to people — and I wasn’t part of this culture at all. I mean I don’t think I even really knew what the Ivy League schools were when I was applying to school. There was nobody really shepherding me through this process. And so I’m sort of an outsider to it. But now I’m a parent and the thing that I dread for my child, for my children the most is sort of trying to put them through all of these different paces or make them spend you know their one and only adolescence engaging in kind of pointless extracurricular activities or test prepping or doing all of the things that get you ready for this Hunger Games competition. And so it seems like we’ve created this culture where just like entire families are supposed to orient their lives to getting through a process that is both sort of corrupted and pointless. You know it’s not just about how we create the elite. It’s such a profound waste of time and energy and, you know, the limited number of days we have on this earth.ross douthatI think we’re all parents whose kids are thankfully too young to be fully immersed in this madness. But the truth is you know that we can joke about the idea of replacing the system with a lottery but frankly wouldn’t it be kind of fantastic if it was just this totally random lottery and there was nothing you could do as a parent.david leonhardtAnd on that utopian note we will leave this discussion. Jamelle thank you so much for joining us.jamelle bouieThank you so much for having me.david leonhardtNow it’s time for our weekly recommendation when we give you a suggestion of something to take your mind off of politics. This week it’s your turn, Michelle. What do you have for us?michelle goldbergSo I’m a little late to this but I’m going to recommend the ABC podcast “The Dropout.” It’s a series about Elizabeth Holmes and a kind of ginormous scam that was Theranos. And it is one of the great scams of our age. You know probably a lot of our listeners know this, right, it was meant to revolutionize the way blood tests were done and revolutionize the health care sector. And it had all these super powerful people investing in it. And she had like little Theranos clinics set up in Walgreens and it was just a total scam. It just didn’t work. And it’s this amazing thing because you listen as all of these people inside the company know that this thing doesn’t work. They know that it’s a scam. And yet it gets bigger and bigger. She’s on more and more magazine covers. She’s interviewed by Bill Clinton at the Clinton Global Initiative. You know she becomes the youngest ever female self-made billionaire. And it’s all built on nothing. And yet and it took so long to come out. I mean it’s both you know sort of a fascinating story in its own right and such a perfect metaphor for our age of grift.david leonhardtWell I’ve listened to it too and I really liked it. And at one point I thought to myself oh my goodness if someone were trying to prank Silicon Valley to come up with the biggest cliche of a company that was just a scam, Ttis is what they do. I mean they’d dress like Steve Jobs the way she did.michelle goldbergRight.david leonhardtThe one thing I think it’s important to add is that much of this is based on reporting by John Carreyrou of the Wall Street Journal and he has a book out on the scandal called “Bad Blood.” And although I haven’t read it a couple of friends of mine have and they say it’s great and it’s an enormously quick read. So there’s the documentary. There’s the book and there’s the podcast.ross douthatMy wife has read the book and I highly recommend it. So I can recommend it by proxy.david leonhardtExcellent. Michelle again what’s the name of the podcast.michelle goldbergIt’s called “The Dropout.“.david leonhardtWe’re going to end this week’s episode by hearing from you our listeners. A lot of you had strong opinions about our episode last week and we wanted to take a moment to give you a chance to air your grievances and opinions. Here goes.listener voicemailsHey guys. Hi, my name is Summer. Hi, my name’s Kathy Keeler. Hi my name’s Jonathan Power. Hey this is Amir calling from Los Angele,s California. I’m calling about Ross’s love of Spindriff. I just wanted to say when Ross was recommending Spindriff at the end of the episode — I was just listening to the bit at the end of the episode where you’re talking about sparkling water. Ross, your idea about seltzer water is one of the best recommendations I’ve heard. I just wanted to reinforce our amazing Spindrift is wrong. Ross, I appreciate your recommendation for Spindrift and at the same time, you don’t need a blind taste test to explain why or how it tastes better. The reason it can’t play better is because it actually has literal fruit juice in it. It has three grams of sugar in each can. That’s stuff’s pretty good but it’s unfair to make that like your favorite because it’s sweetened. It has fruit juice in it. I wanted to just say one word to you: SodaStream. I love the seltzer it makes and you can also control the amount of bubbles. You’ll be helping the environment, saving yourself some money and also having as much bubbles as you like. Kroger has these cola flavored sparkling waters. [DOUTHAT AND LEONHARDT LAUGH] They have regular cola, Dr. Pepper and root beer. So those are my favorite. Enjoy, bye bye. I hope you all have a great day! Thanks. That’s my recommendation this week. Thanks. Thanks guys I love the podcast. [ALL LAUGH]ross douthatSo we’re starting a self-serving podcast obviously. It’s going to be all seltzer.david leonhardtApparently we already have.michelle goldbergAnd after that, as you guys know, after that podcast I became a convert. You know it’s the only time I think I will ever say that Ross was totally right.david leonhardtA convert not just to seltzer but to Spindrift?michelle goldbergYeah not to Catholicism.david leonhardtOr conservatism.ross douthatIt’s a gateway drug Michelle.david leonhardtHere let me leave you all with this. [CAN OPENING, BUBBLES FIZZING SOUND] As you can obviously tell we like to hear your feedback so please leave us a voicemail at 347-915-4324. That’s 347-915-4324. No doubt there are a few seltzer brands that we have not yet mentioned on this show. You can also email us at argument@nytimes.com. If you like what you hear we would very much like it if you would leave us a reading or review in Apple podcasts. This week’s show was produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media and edited by Lacy Roberts. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn. We had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett, Ian Prasad Philbrick and Francis Ying. Our theme was composed by Allison Leyton-Brown. We will see you back here next week. Ross have you listened to it?ross douthatI only listened to our podcast, David. [GOLDBER G AND LEONHARDT LAUGH] Has it been on our podcast?Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google Play | RadioPublic | StitcherThis week on “The Argument,” how much blame does President Trump deserve for white supremacist attacks like the New Zealand mosque shooting? Michelle Goldberg argues that the president bridges racist ideology and the internet’s nihilistic troll culture. Ross Douthat thinks European anxieties toward immigrants and Islam have gone global. David Leonhardt points to data that shows rising hate crimes and racist speech parallel to Trump’s rise. And returning guest Jamelle Bouie likens Trump to Andrew Johnson, a president whose indifference toward racist violence helped embolden it.Then, the four columnists debate what a fairer system of higher education might look like. In the wake of the Operation Varsity Blues college admissions scandal, how should meritocracy, elitism and college sports be handled?And finally, Michelle recommends a recent podcast that spotlights yet another chapter in this American age of grift.Background Reading:Ross on the college admissions scandal, the WASPs and the case against meritocracyMichelle on the college admissions scandal, Elizabeth Holmes and our scam economyDavid on Trump’s encouragement for white-nationalist violence, Trump’s history of racism and the college admissions scandal as sports scandalJamelle on white supremacy and the New Zealand shooting and how Trump channels reactionary white majoritarianismI’ve been an Op-Ed columnist since 2009, and I write about politics, religion, pop culture, sociology and the places where they all intersect. I’m a Catholic and a conservative, in that order, which means that I’m against abortion and critical of the sexual revolution, but I tend to agree with liberals that the Republican Party is too friendly to the rich. I was against Donald Trump in 2016 for reasons specific to Donald Trump, but in general I think the populist movements in Europe and America have legitimate grievances and I often prefer the populists to the “reasonable” elites. I’ve written books about Harvard, the G.O.P., American Christianity and Pope Francis; I’m working on one about decadence. Benedict XVI was my favorite pope. I review movies for National Review and have strong opinions about many prestige television shows. I have three small children, two girls and a boy, and I live in New Haven with my wife.I’ve been an Op-Ed columnist at The New York Times since 2017, writing mainly about politics, ideology and gender. These days people on the right and the left both use “liberal” as an epithet, but that’s basically what I am, though the nightmare of Donald Trump’s presidency has radicalized me and pushed me leftward. I’ve written three books, including one, in 2006, about the danger of right-wing populism in its religious fundamentalist guise. (My other two were about the global battle over reproductive rights and, in a brief detour from politics, about an adventurous Russian émigré who helped bring yoga to the West.) I love to travel; a long time ago, after my husband and I eloped, we spent a year backpacking through Asia. Now we live in Brooklyn with our son and daughter.I’ve worked at The Times since 1999 and have been an Op-Ed columnist since 2016. I caught the journalism bug a very long time ago — first as a little kid in the late 1970s who loved reading the Boston Globe sports section and later as a teenager working on my high school and college newspapers. I discovered that when my classmates and I put a complaint in print, for everyone to see, school administrators actually paid attention. I’ve since worked as a metro reporter at The Washington Post and a writer at BusinessWeek magazine. At The Times, I started as a reporter in the business section and have also been a Times Magazine staff writer, the Washington bureau chief and the founding editor of The Upshot.My politics are left of center. But I’m also to the right of many Times readers. I think education reform has accomplished a lot. I think two-parent families are good for society. I think progressives should be realistic about the cultural conservatism that dominates much of this country. Most of all, however, I worry deeply about today’s Republican Party, which has become dangerously extreme. This country faces some huge challenges — inequality, climate change, the rise of China — and they’ll be very hard to solve without having both parties committed to the basic functioning of American democracy.Tune in on iTunes, Google Play, Spotify, Stitcher or wherever you listen to podcasts. Tell us what you think at argument@nytimes.com. Follow Michelle Goldberg (@michelleinbklyn), Ross Douthat (@DouthatNYT) and David Leonhardt (@DLeonhardt) on Twitter. This week’s show is produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media and edited by Lacy Roberts. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn. We had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett, Ian Prasad Philbrick and Francis Ying. Our theme is composed by Allison Leyton-Brown.Advertisement