https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/29/arts/television/game-of-thrones-season-5.html
Rewatching ‘Game of Thrones,’ Season 5: Shame, Shame, Shame - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1727
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jennifer VineyardThe final season of “Game of Thrones” arrives April 14. Before then, we’re getting prepared by rewatching the first seven seasons. Sign up to get these straight to your inbox.I wish we had some wine for you — it’s a bit early in the day for us. Welcome back to our epic “Game of Thrones” rewatch. If you’re just joining us, you can catch up with recaps of past seasons with our ultimate watching guide, which also includes suggested episodes to rewatch in later seasons.Save for one bastard boy, House Baratheon is no more — the inevitable result of all that kinslaying! Message to House Lannister and House Tyrell: That cold war cost you both dearly in public image and hair-care. House Targaryen, riding a dragon is a boss move, but you’ve also been surrounded. House Bolton, you still have the North, but you just lost your key hostage.So the winner of this round is … Littlefinger, yet again. Who cares if he lost a brothel? He’s winning the war. The man has forged the most alliances and he has the most kingdoms in his pocket, even if he is double-crossing them all. Runner-up: The High Sparrow, who gets to savor the sight of royalty kneeling before him.When she’s trying to get on the High Sparrow’s good side, Cersei tells him that the faith and the crown are the two pillars that hold up this world. But are they, really?Until Cersei stupidly reinstated the Faith Militant, how much authority did religious figures really have in Westeros? Certainly the Faith of the Seven was the dominant religion — the High Septon was the officiant at coronations, royal weddings and other ceremonies, and noble households had septas help raise their daughters. (R.I.P., Septa Mordane.) But until recent years, the Faith didn’t really flex its muscles. It ignored Targaryen incest; it did nothing about an execution committed at the Sept of Baelor; it seems to be absent from trials by combat, purportedly held to “let the gods decide.” And so in the King’s Landing riot in Season 2, who do the people choose to rip apart from limb to limb? The High Septon himself. The people — or the gods — have spoken.The High Septon and the High Sparrow only have as much authority as the crown allows. The same is true with another religious figure: Melisandre can only continue burning people alive in the name of the Lord of Light as long as Stannis allows it. She needs his permission, as we see when she must ask him if she can burn Shireen Baratheon. Stannis hesitates at first, but this is no great leap for him — he has previously allowed the red priestess to burn “infidels,” political prisoners and his own in-laws. And as we start to realize in Season 5, she isn’t even preaching the gospel of the Red Temple. Another vampy red priestess in Volantis heralds Dany — not Stannis — as the Chosen One. Mel doesn’t even have the support of the rest of Team R’hllor. The Red Temple might have more of a foothold in Essos, but in Westeros, its power is, shall we say, limited.In terms of actual power, the death cult at the House of Black and White in Braavos might reign supreme: They are not dependent on any one monarch, nor any one leader to represent them. The Many-Faced God has many wealthy patrons, most of whom prefer to remain anonymous. Should any of them wish to topple a government, let’s say, they can ask the Faceless Men to kill someone and no one will be the wiser. The Iron Bank of Braavos would certainly be well-positioned to use this service if any ruler defaulted on a loan. Or they could just throw their support to the ruler’s enemies, as they do with Stannis while still backing the Lannisters. At least the House of Black and White doesn’t try to impose its will on the masses. (Only a few targets.)The Faith of the Seven didn’t really attempt to impose its will until the High Sparrow came along. Perhaps the High Septon was corrupt, or perhaps he was only human and tolerant of other human frailties. But the High Sparrow’s version of the religion is inhumanly harsh, particularly to gay people and women. As much as the High Sparrow claims he’s interested in treating all sinners alike — “sons of high lords, sons of fishermen” — he’s really only targeting nobles. He is less interested in crimes than comeuppance. He wants to bring down the monarchy, to humiliate them, to strip them of power.For now, it’s all blowing up in Cersei’s face. She won’t be the only one.The first name on Arya’s kill list was Ser Meryn Trant, because he killed her sword-fighting instructor. He also beat up Sansa and probably countless other little girls, so Arya’s revenge felt like justice. We talked to the actor Ian Beattie about filming one of the most prolonged death scenes in Season 5. (Adapted from an earlier interview with Beattie.)How did you find out about your character’s death?Dan Weiss and David Benioff let it slip. David had actually let it slip to me in Season 2 that Arya was going to kill me. When I walked on set in Season 2, he said, “You might have heard that you’re going to die this season. Well, you’re not. You are going to die [later], and Arya’s going to kill you.” I was absolutely delighted not to die in Season 2. [Laughs] I know my character is still alive at the end of the fifth book, though. And then, at the start of Season 5, I got the conference call where they basically said, “Valar Morghulis.” They said at this point, we’re going to see a really nasty side of Ser Meryn Trant. And they said, “You’re going to have a pretty spectacular death.”What are your favorite memories from your last day on set?We started at about seven or eight in the morning, to put the prosthetics on my eyes, and so I was going around the whole day blind, until about nine or ten at night. And there was a lot of blood. When we were about to do the very last take, I heard David Nutter talking to the special effects guys who were going to be pumping the blood. One of them asked, “David, how much blood do you want here?” And David said, “Red Wedding.” That’s something that will stay with me for an awfully long time. I’m not sure, but I think it was the most expensive single death ever filmed, at least through Season 6.Why was that?Because they couldn’t actually poke my eyes out. [Laughs] The knife Maisie Williams used was bladeless. The blade was added in postproduction. And there were so many stab wounds! Five or six to the chest, one to the back, one to the side. So it just took a very long time to film. It was technically challenging, emotional and very, very sticky! And I couldn’t see.Did you read any of the fan reaction?I saw one video where it was shown in America. There were 20 to 30 people in the room watching, and they were going, “Ooo, aah!” As soon as I died, there was a massive cheer, and that was the biggest compliment. That meant that I had done my job. And I met one fan who got a tattoo of Ser Meryn on his arm! [Laughs]Who had your favorite death on the show, and why?The one that broke my heart was Hodor. That was absolutely genius. The writing of that, the whole buildup over six years, to finally reveal it in that way? Absolute pure genius. Even when I watch it now, I cry. It was just heartbreaking. And the Red Viper, because I did not see that coming. Don’t talk! Just kill him! [Laughs]What did you think about any of Arya’s other kills? Since you were the first on her kill list …Quite a compliment, that. I suppose with the others, the deaths were reasonably swift and almost in the heat of battle. With me, she had time to take her vengeance. I think she’s better able to control and channel her anger since murdering me, but I don’t think she’s gotten rid of it, by any stretch of the imagination. She’s a very, very worthy adversary. I just can’t wait to see what happens to the rest of her story.In a rarity for “Game of Thrones,” Maester Aemon managed to live long enough to die of old age, instead of violence. Sadly, the actor who played him, Peter Vaughan, died as well in 2016. But plenty of the other actors who portrayed long-gone characters are still around to entertain us. Here’s a cast catch-up:Ciarán Hinds (Mance Rayder) continued to lead his forces to safety from a supernatural predator in a difficult wintry crossing, trading the Wall for the Northwest Passage in the excellent AMC series “The Terror.”Ian McElhinney (Barristan Selmy) continues to provide a grandfatherly presence in “Krypton” and “The Derry Girls.”Joel Fry (Hizdahr zo Loraq) is doing a lot more comedy since he left Slaver’s Bay. He was the lead’s best friend in NBC’s British export “You, Me and the Apocalypse” and his next film is Danny Boyle’s musical comedy “Yesterday,” in which he plays a music industry figure.Charlotte Hope (Myranda) went from lowborn to highborn. She’s Catherine of Aragon in the upcoming Starz mini-series “The Spanish Princess.”Birgitte Hjort Sørensen (Karsi) got to live again on HBO’s short-lived series “Vinyl” as Ingrid, a member of Andy Warhol’s entourage.• Our recap of Season 5. [The New York Times.]• Our review of Season 5. [The New York Times.]• More rape controversy. [The New York Times]• And more: A critique of rape scenes. [Wired]What “Game of Thrones” needs to learn about rape. [Salon]“Game of Thrones” has always been about rape. [Washington Post]Debunking bad rape arguments. [Raw Story]• Beginning the endgame. [Vulture]• Why we need “Game of Thrones.” [Salon]• Take me out to the “Game of Thrones” ballgame. [The New Yorker, Vulture]• Dear White Walkers … [The New Yorker]• Poor Barristan Selmy. [The Telegraph]• Cersei’s body double speaks. [Entertainment Weekly]• Eunuch sex advice. [Vulture]If you were disappointed with Sansa’s story arc with the Boltons, what happens in the books is far, far worse. It just happens to someone else.The Boltons still want a marriage alliance with the Starks to solidify their hold on the North. But instead of giving them Sansa, Littlefinger gives them “Arya” — Sansa’s BFF Jeyne Poole, who is forced to masquerade as Arya. In the wake of Ned’s arrest, Littlefinger takes Jeyne to one of his brothels, where he has her whipped into submission and forced to train as a sex worker. After the Red Wedding, he compels her to become Arya, to help the Boltons marry a Stark.The Boltons are in on this charade, as are the Lannisters, so a Stark-Bolton marriage wouldn’t be a shock to Cersei as it is in the show. Jaime even informs Brienne, so she won’t risk her life trying to rescue the wrong girl. The Boltons help cloak the deception by having Theon give the girl away during the wedding ceremony, the logic being that if the Starks’ ward is seen to accept the girl’s identity, no one would question her legitimacy. A dead giveaway, however, is the color of Jeyne and Arya’s eyes: Jeyne’s are brown, Arya’s gray. Jeyne is also slightly older — Arya is only 11 years old at this point.The wedding is meant to provoke Stannis into a fight. (“His clansmen will not abandon the daughter of their precious Ned to such as you,” Roose tells Ramsay. “Stannis must march or lose them.”) And indeed, when Stannis gets word of the impending marriage, he takes the bait. Saving “Arya” is a highly divisive mission among Stannis’ captains, and it’s not the only rescue attempt underway — Melisandre (who remains at the Wall, instead of joining Stannis) teams up with Jon Snow to send Mance Rayder (who wasn’t burned at the stake, but was saved by body-swapping glamour magic) and six wildling women to infiltrate Winterfell.Roose Bolton summons all of the northern lords to the wedding. Many attend, some grudgingly or with plans to undermine the Boltons’ rule. Too many are aware of Ramsay’s true nature: his various crimes and cruelties to women. (Littlefinger can’t plead ignorance.) Lord Manderly serves up a gruesome repast to the Boltons and the Freys at fake-Arya’s wedding feast — three huge pies quite likely containing bits of the three missing Frey sons. In the show, Arya inherits this recipe.After the wedding feast, Ramsay has his men order Theon to bring “Arya” to his bedchamber. There, he makes Theon cut off her clothes and ultimately participate in the wedding night rape; Theon is also raped himself. In the books, Theon/Reek is much more damaged at this point, believe it or not — Ramsay had also shattered his teeth and relieved him of other body parts.From there, things only get worse. People throughout Winterfell — including the northern lords who came for the wedding and are now snowbound — can hear Jeyne’s sobbing, which Theon describes as “too painful to endure.” The rumor mill is fueled by reports that “Arya” is kept naked and chained to a bedpost. Guards speculate why she needs a hot bath every night. The serving women see the bruises, and those who accompany Theon to rescue her see teeth marks. So abused is the poor girl that she thinks the rescue must be another trick. Eventually, the rescue succeeds, and Theon and “Arya” jump off the battlements of Winterfell together.Sansa’s experience on the show, then, has been simplified and sanitized. She is spared some of the sadism and torture, and she doesn’t suffer a psychological collapse. Fewer people die on Sansa’s behalf and even if many did, they weren’t expending their efforts to save a fraud. In the books, Sansa is relatively safe and sound in the Eyrie, although she’s still in disguise and involved in various political machinations. Apparently, the showrunners thought giving Sansa the fake Arya plot would allow her to play a bigger role in the story and that Theon’s redemption arc should involve someone the audience cares about. This didn’t work.This week, readers wanted to know more about Stannis’s red priestess.Melisandre, in the beginning of Season 6, reveals herself as an old woman/creature. I find it curious, especially since she comes from Asshai where all manner of dark and creepy things dwell. What is the nature of her being? What type of creature is Melisandre? — Noelani CloughIs Melisandre’s youthful appearance real or just an illusion? If it’s just an illusion, wouldn’t Stannis literally feel the truth? And wouldn’t she slip during the exhausting attempts to bring Jon back? — Alma SouthmaydMelisandre is quite the mysterious woman, and that’s on purpose — part of her power derives from keeping us in the dark about how effortless or difficult her sorcery is. But we do know a little. Her glamour spell is made of “shadow and suggestion,” she claims in the books. “The wearer’s essence does not change, only his seeming,” which means, yes, Stannis should feel the truth of her physiology. But would he want to? “Men see what they expect to see,” she says. Meaning, if Stannis thinks he’s having sex with a younger woman, he’s going to disregard sensations telling him otherwise that could ruin the moment. And yes, magic can be exhausting, but not in the way you’re thinking. Mel sometimes feels like the ruby is burning her (“she feared her own flesh might start to smoke and blacken”), so perhaps she wants to take it off, but she chooses when to seek relief.Even though she’s lived “for years beyond count,” Mel’s only human, not a creature. She remembers being sold as a slave girl to the Red Temple, which trained its child slaves to become priests, temple prostitutes or warriors. It’s impossible to say exactly where most are from, although Thoros of Myr, also sold as a child slave, most likely came from Myr. But despite the commonly used phrase “Melisandre of Asshai,” Mel’s not from Asshai. She studied in Asshai, the Harvard of magic in that world. Mel most likely majored in shadowbinding, but she may have also studied under alchemists, shapechangers, spellsingers, pyromancers and bloodmages. Not all red priests and priestesses study abroad, nor do all of them use glamour spells. But Kinvara might, considering she also wears the ruby choker. She seems rather young to be the highest of their order, doesn’t she?Dance with the Night King.Come at me, bro.Real Housewives of King’s Landing.“Game of Thrones,” the musical.Maisie Williams rocks the vote.Jon Snow at a dinner party.“Family Guy” shame.Rickon who?Advertisement