https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/01/reader-center/keeping-political-secrets-from-family.html
13 Political Secrets People Kept From Family and Friends. What’s Yours?  - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
3000
AdvertisementSupported byReader CenterWe asked readers to share a political secret they’d never told a soul. Hundreds responded. By The New York TimesDid you tell people you voted when you didn’t? Do you share the beliefs of friends or family members in public, but not in private? You’re not alone.[See the results for the House of Representatives, the Senate and governors’ races, and read our analysis.]In the weeks leading up to the midterm elections, The New York Times teamed up with Bustle to ask readers: What’s a political secret you’ve never told a soul? Would you tell us, as long as we didn’t reveal your identity?We received hundreds of responses, and asked artists to illustrate some of the most illuminating. Here are 13 of them. [Do you have a political secret? It’s not too late to share it. We want to hear it for a coming episode of “The Daily.” Call us at 646-598-6012 and leave a voice mail telling us your secret and why you can’t share it.]I pretend to be a Democrat because I feel like people assume Democrats are “good” and Republicans are “bad.” I am pro-choice, pro-gay marriage, anti-hate, but Democrats to me are even bigger hypocrites than Republicans. I always vote for the most socially liberal Republican and I lie about it. — 30, New York I care deeply about the toxic culture we’re living in but I can't make myself DO anything about it. I guess I don't care *that* much? — 28, California[Sign up here for Gender Letter, a weekly newsletter on women and culture. You can also follow NYT Gender on Instagram.]I’m a Socialist but haven’t told my parents because it would be like coming out a second time. — 17, New YorkI’ve had two abortions (in 1973 and 1974), but I very rarely/never mention it when saying I am pro-choice, support abortion rights, and am a longtime supporter of Planned Parenthood. — 71, New YorkMy dad voted for Trump and I voted for Hillary. I've never told him how much it hurt, not that he voted for his own interests, but that he never stated any disagreement with Trump's treatment of women. As his daughter, that broke me … He has no idea how much therapy I've had to do just to learn to love and trust him again. I don't know if I can ever tell him. — 23, ChicagoI grew up in the “Bible Belt” in South Carolina in an extremely conservative and religious family. I’m now an atheist and extremely liberal. If my family knew I was pro-choice, the reaction might be worse than when I told them I was no longer a Christian (my mother told me it would have been easier if I’d told her I had cancer). My youngest brother has Down syndrome, so my family views “pro-choice” as the belief that my brother doesn’t deserve to be alive. Politics has become our own “don’t ask, don’t tell.” — 31, OhioI know my husband would divorce me if he knew I voted for Trump. Some secrets save marriages. — 23, UtahMy family has reliably voted Democratic for decades. So when my brother came of age and sought to vote for Trump, we didn’t know how to feel … On Election Day, when he needed a ride to the polling station, I hid in Target’s parking lot. Consequently, he couldn’t vote. — 19, St. LouisI am a Republican, but I do feel like it’s a woman’s choice whether or not to terminate pregnancy (very early on). — 26, Location unknownI found the password to my parents’ DirecTV and had Fox News marked as a restricted channel. I knew I wouldn’t last long (my mom called and unblocked it) but one week without my dad listening to Tucker Carlson’s bull was worth it. — 32, BangkokI don’t know enough about politics to understand the importance of voting in every election — and I don’t care to inform myself because I don’t feel like my vote makes a difference. — 24, Location unknownI voted for Obama both times, and I voted for Trump. I would also vote for him again if he runs. — 44, MissouriA best friend's dad was running for local office. The man drove me nuts. During the campaigning, I always had an excuse not to volunteer. Finally, as the election date approached my friend gave me fliers, posters and balloons to distribute. I left the campaign office, went to the other side of town and threw it all in the trash. — 31, OhioAdvertisement