https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/11/us/texas-national-guard.html
On the Border With the National Guard: An ‘Extra Pair of Eyes and Ears’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2290
AdvertisementSupported byBy Manny FernandezSTARR COUNTY, Tex. — The soldier stood on a cliff above the swift green waters of the Rio Grande, peering into the brush with binoculars, an M-4 carbine rifle at his chest, a 9-millimeter pistol in a holster low on his thigh. The rainstorm was over, but a thick layer of mud lined the bottom of his combat boots.He was one of 250 Texas National Guard troops stationed on the border with Mexico, part of President Trump’s latest plan to stanch the flow of immigrants entering the country illegally. The troops at the observation post chatted very little. They stared into the brush, took a few steps to change their position, then stared some more.Then it happened — one of the soldiers saw a raft in the river. The troops got on their radio and summoned the Border Patrol down below, fulfilling, military officials said, one of the primary missions of the National Guard’s controversial mobilization on the southern border: to observe and report.On Tuesday, the Guard allowed a group of journalists to shadow some of its troops on the border, an early look at the new deployment that follows a surge in illegal crossings into South Texas. The Department of Homeland Security said more than 37,000 people were detained in March. Though the flow of asylum seekers into Texas regularly goes up in the springtime, detentions this year were three times the levels seen in March of last year.“We’re like an extra pair of eyes and ears,” said a Texas National Guard captain, one of several positioned at two observation posts in rural Starr County in the Rio Grande Valley. Like other troops, he had been instructed by his commanders to speak anonymously; many of them live and work on the border, and there are fears that the soldiers could become potential targets for cartel-linked smugglers.At another watch post farther down the river, male and female soldiers were also focusing their binoculars intently on the brushy river banks, and the landscape beyond.Across the river, a Mexican neighborhood hummed with life. Children waded into the water at the river’s edge and a man fished near a smoky barbecue grill. A rooster crowed as a soldier wiped smudges from the lenses of his binoculars with his uniform. A white car peeled out on the Mexican side and then sped out of the neighborhood; one soldier noticed that it was the car’s third pass-through that afternoon.“Hey!” a man on the Mexican side shouted at the troops.The soldiers ignored him, and kept their binoculars trained ahead.At the observation posts and at the Guard’s armory headquarters in the nearby town of Weslaco, the troops could be seen embarking on two seemingly contradictory missions: standing out, and blending in.Up high on the edges of the river, the troops were meant to be seen and feared. They were heavily armed, dressed in battle fatigues and equipped with military vehicles. The chatter from their radios filled the air.But out on the streets of the South Texas cities they traveled through, they were all but invisible as they sat in ordinary civilian pickup trucks. Many people still associate the calling-up of the National Guard with disasters and riots, and the troops’ lack of visibility in border communities is an attempt to soften their presence. Aiming to allay criticism that the deployments turn border cities into militarized zones, officials have taken steps to demilitarize the look of their operations.At one point on Tuesday, troops in a minivan and Ford 4x4 pickup trucks sat for a long time at a four-way stop as a group of high school students got off a yellow school bus. Many of the students crossing the streets did not look twice at the waiting vehicles. They had interrupted a military convoy that was cutting through their town, but didn’t know it.In Texas, the National Guard had already been deployed on the border as part of a state-ordered call-up, and this low-key visibility in border cities has helped ease any worries that the military was invading.“They were just embedded so efficiently that really you couldn’t tell that they were out there,” said Pete Saenz, the mayor of the border city of Laredo who supports the new deployment of troops. “If they do it the way it’s been done, using the National Guard the way it’s been done in the past, I think it’s acceptable.”As part of the president’s order, Gov. Greg Abbott announced that Texas would deploy more than 1,000 troops to the state’s 1,200-mile border with Mexico, adding about 300 troops a week to the current contingent of about 250 troops. Mr. Trump said he expects a total of 2,000 to 4,000 troops along the southwest border, including additional deployments in New Mexico and Arizona.In an interview on Fox Business on Tuesday, Mr. Abbott said the Guard presence on the border has no end date in sight as the Trump administration seeks to complete a border wall.“They’re going to be there, I perceive, for a long time — years — because if you just look at what the president said, he said that this is a gap filler until he gets funding for the wall and greater border security,” the governor said. “We are prepared for the long run to have National Guard presence there, to make sure we’re doing everything we can to better secure the border.”Gov. Jerry Brown of California said on Wednesday that his state, too, will accept federal funding to add about 400 National Guard troops, to help combat transnational criminal gangs, human trafficking and the smuggling of drugs and weapons along the border.California presently has about 250 Guard members employed in such operations, including 55 along the Mexico border.“But let’s be crystal clear on the scope of this mission,” Mr. Brown said in a statement. “This will not be a mission to build a new wall. It will not be a mission to round up women and children or detain people escaping violence and seeking a better life. And the California National Guard will not be enforcing federal immigration laws.”In South Texas, the observation posts are the front lines of the stepped-up border operation.At the cliffside post that spotted the raft (it was unclear whether it was carrying people or cargo), the soldiers’ headquarters had four big wheels: a green Humvee. Mounted on top of the vehicle was not a machine gun but a giant optic system — effectively a boxy, superpowered pair of binoculars — and next to a rear tire, a red portable cooler. The cross-saber insignia spray-painted next to the driver’s door was left over from a different mission. One soldier was operating the Humvee’s optic system, while the others paced back and forth on the cliff, watching. They wore sunglasses, combat fatigues, canteens and steel-plated body armor. One had a wad of chewing tobacco in his mouth. Some were in their 20s; others, their 40s and 50s.The majority seen Tuesday were Hispanic. Here, the visible face of the president’s deployment to thwart illegal immigration is made up of men and women of Mexican-American heritage whose relatives were immigrants themselves. They are citizen soldiers, on loan in a sense from their jobs and their families.“When I’m called up to do my duty, I’m a Texan helping Texans, and I’m sure that the majority of the troops feel the same way,” said the captain, who is Hispanic.Texas has maintained a continuous and costly National Guard presence on the border since 2014. Rick Perry, then the governor, sent 1,000 troops to the border in July of that year and his successor, Mr. Abbott, kept the troops there, though in smaller numbers. About 100 troops were stationed on the Texas border when Mr. Trump ordered the new deployment.Officials say the troop presence is freeing up Border Patrol agents to focus on apprehensions. The soldiers are prevented from detaining immigrants trying to illegally cross into the United States. A Defense Department deployment memo stated that National Guard personnel “will not perform law enforcement activities or interact with migrants or other persons detained” without the approval of the secretary of defense, and are to be armed only in “circumstances that might require self-defense.”Yet such deployments are costly, and have not been without controversy in tax-conscious Texas.The use of civilian rental vehicles illustrates the expense of border deployments, both in the state-run mobilization and the new one ordered by the president. The rentals prevent wear and tear on military vehicles, and also help troops blend into civilian communities. In 2016, Texas National Guard documents obtained by NBC 5 in Fort Worth showed that the Guard had spent $1.8 million on rental cars at that point. One van was rented for $1,100 but driven only 47 miles; another was driven only nine miles at a rental cost of $1,300.By 2017, the total price tag for the state-ordered Guard deployment and other border-related Texas Military Forces expenses was nearly $63 million. Officials estimate that the state deployment lately has been running a tab of about $1 million a month.State officials and Guard leaders defend the costs, and say the state deployment has been a success. “The addition of National Guard on the border has proved to have a meaningful impact to reduce the flow of people and illegal activities coming across the border,” Mr. Abbott said in a statement.Political opponents, especially those in border communities, are raising questions nonetheless.“That money could be better used,” said State Senator Juan Hinojosa, a Democrat whose district includes Mission and other border towns. “I think there’s no doubt that we want to secure our border, that we as a nation have a right to defend our border and define our border. But let’s do it in a smart way,” he said. “We have the tools and the resources to do that without getting the military involved. This is not a war zone.”Follow @MannyNYT on TwitterDave Montgomery contributed reporting from Austin, Tex.Advertisement