https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/28/arts/television/review-in-travelers-some-serious-time-sharing.html
Review: In ‘Travelers,’ Some Serious Time-Sharing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2078
AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerProposed slogan for a substantial chunk of television in 2016: “Better Living Through Time Travel.” Everywhere you looked last year, characters were jumping about in time, generally hoping to improve their own lot or the world’s, and generally failing.The latest batch of time-defying do-gooders turned up on Dec. 23 on Netflix when “Travelers,” a tasty science-fiction series from Canada, began streaming. (It premiered on Showcase in that country in October.) It’s hard to find a fresh take on the time-travel conceit, since it’s been around so long and has been so heavily mined lately, but “Travelers” has some attention-grabbing flourishes and fine acting.Centuries in the future, someone figures out how to send human consciousness back in time and insert it into a host body at the moment of the host’s death. Why would future us want to do this? Because apparently life a few hundred years out is unpleasant, and the race is struggling to survive, something that isn’t described in detail so much as implied by small moments — the time travelers savor certain foods, for instance, as if they had never tasted them before.The travelers hope to alter events in our time to improve things in theirs, though the application of this philosophy is maddeningly inconsistent, which is a logical problem with a lot of time-travel yarns. But never mind that; the intriguing part of “Travelers” is that the newcomers, thanks to an imperfect vetting process, sometimes land in problematic hosts. Philip (Reilly Dolman) finds himself in a heroin addict’s body. Marcy (MacKenzie Porter) takes up residence in the body of a woman with intellectual disabilities, and, boy, is her social worker surprised when his barely verbal charge is suddenly more articulate than he is.Some travelers’ issues are less consuming but still vexing. Grant (Eric McCormack) assumes the body of an F.B.I. agent whose wife wouldn’t mind a little romance now and then. Trevor (Jared Abrahamson) is a high school athlete who, in between world-saving missions, has to worry about his grades. And Carly (Nesta Cooper) has a baby.This group, which receives instructions from the future, is only one of many teams that have been sent back. The fun of the series is watching the five try to blend into the pre-existing lives they have inherited without raising suspicions. It’s the little things that matter. Grant’s wife (Leah Cairns) wonders why he’s suddenly calling her Kathryn rather than the familiar Kat. Trevor no longer knows how to throw a football.The show, created by Brad Wright, is enjoyable science fiction if you can ignore the contradictions (why is it fine to change the future of the human race but not to save a boy about to be killed by kidnappers?) — and if you haven’t already had enough time-traveling.Last February, you’ll recall, James Franco went back to the early 1960s to try to stop the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in “11.22.63,” Hulu’s nicely turned adaptation of a Stephen King novel. The fall season brought both “Timeless,” on NBC, in which a team pursues a shadowy figure through history, and “Frequency,” a satisfying CW series in which the heroine communicates with her dead father across time. And that’s not to mention that time-jumping woman on the Starz show “Outlander” and assorted Syfy series like “12 Monkeys.”If this were a Ph.D. thesis, I would now try to make the case that this glut of time-travel shows reflects the cultural moment, that it is a manifestation of our desire to flee to a more trouble-free time, or to solve intractable present-day problems, not through hard work, but by making a small tweak in the past. The reality, though, is more mundane. There are a lot of time-travel shows because there are a lot of small-screen outlets desperate for content, and the time-travel premise is remarkably versatile.You can use it to fashion a high-concept science-fiction series like “Travelers” or “12 Monkeys,” one that bends the minds of both its characters and its viewers. You can use it to create a fantasy romance like “Outlander” or a historical adventure show like “Timeless.” Comedy seem underrepresented? Fox has a time-travel show, “Making History,” on the way.Anyway, this particular spate invites us to contemplate the year that has just concluded. Who among us couldn’t put together a “Top Five Occurrences of 2016 I’d Like to Undo” list? Yeah, it’s fun to dream of what might have been or of what we wish hadn’t been. When you perfect your own time machine, though, just remember what TV teaches us. It’s almost always true that the more the characters on these shows try to alter events, the more mucked up things become.TravelersStreaming on Netflix.Advertisement