https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/01/opinion/trump-border-mexico.html
Opinion | Trump’s Border ‘Solutions’ Will Make Things Worse - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2756
AdvertisementSupported byThere’s been a surge of migrant families at the southern border. The answer is not to close the border and cut off aid to Central American nations.By The Editorial BoardThe editorial board represents the opinions of the board, its editor and the publisher. It is separate from the newsroom and the Op-Ed section.By threatening to close the border with Mexico and moving to cut off aid to El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala — the so-called Northern Triangle countries, from which many migrants headed to the United States are coming — President Trump is effectively shooting America in the foot, to paraphrase one expert.Kevin McAleenan, the commissioner of United States Customs and Border Protection, noted last week that the near-record number of migrant families with children seeking asylum both at and in between official ports of entry on the southern border was stretching his agency to a “breaking point.” This was made startlingly clear as photos of hundreds of migrants, including many small children, confined behind razor wire in a makeshift enclosure beneath a bridge in El Paso, spread quickly across the internet. The agency has since closed the holding area.C.B.P. and Immigration and Customs Enforcement, both of which operate under the Department of Homeland Security, have taken steps to grapple with the increased flow of migrants, a vast majority of them families with children seeking asylum. The agencies have diverted resources and personnel to process and care for the migrants, even agreeing to release some families to American cities far from the border.“We are doing everything we can to simply avoid a tragedy in a C.B.P. facility,” Mr. McAleenan said. “But with these numbers, with the types of illnesses we’re seeing at the border, I fear that it’s just a matter of time.”In an attempt to ease the problem, Kirstjen Nielsen, the homeland security secretary, signed a compact with officials from the Northern Triangle last week to help curb the complex drivers of irregular migration — including crime and gang violence in the region. Mr. Trump, less than a day later, announced he was ending aid to those countries. Nonsensically, Mr. Trump has insisted that the real problem is Mexico, which he suggested is doing “nothing” to help stop the tide of migrants. That’s despite the efforts by Mexican leaders to intercept migrant groups, providing temporary visas to asylum seekers and allowing some making the trek north to remain in Mexico while they await court hearings in the United States.As with the president’s wall, which would do little to discourage unauthorized migration, let alone illegal drug trafficking, no one with a working knowledge of immigration policy believes that closing the border is a solution to the recent surge. The economic disruption for border communities and the impact on trade would be disastrous. Plus, closing the border won’t stop migrants from stepping onto United States soil and claiming asylum, as many of the groups surrendering to border agents in recent months have done in between ports of entry.What would help much more is action to address the root causes of the surge in border crossings, from reforming federal immigration laws to aid to improve economic conditions in Central America. And most urgently, Congress needs to come up with a more nimble legal framework to address the glut of asylum claims and more funding for log-jammed immigration courts to process them. This moment calls for proactive measures — not incendiary policies that are destined to backfire.The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement