https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/20/dining/pretty-southern-gluten-free-greenpoint-restaurant-news.html
Pretty Southern, Serving Gluten-Free Comfort Foods, to Open in Greenpoint - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
183
AdvertisementSupported byOff the MenuBy Florence FabricantPRETTY SOUTHERN The chef Sam Talbot, most recently based in Maine, grew up near Charleston, S.C., so he’s particular about his fried chicken. He has also been a private chef for professional basketball players and racecar drivers, and said that many of them wanted tempting food like fried chicken and biscuits to be gluten-free. That’s what has inspired his new casual venture into Southern fare. “It can be healthy,” he said. The fried chicken and biscuits are available with or without gluten, as are the mac and cheese, potpies, several sandwiches and some of the desserts. He makes his own gluten-free flour, and cooks his grits in coconut milk, to accommodate dairy-free diets. The dozen or so sides are based mostly on organic vegetables, and there are also rotisserie chickens. The restaurant will be in a small space with exposed brick, a sleek bar and 22 seats indoors, 20 outside. (Opens Thursday): 14 Bedford Avenue (Lorimer Street), Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 718-349-2967, prettysouthernbk.com.FILTERED COFFEE This coffee bar serving Counter Culture coffee, pastries and snacks is opening in what is to become a 6,500-square-foot food hall. The coffee bar, which has branches in the South Bronx and Hamilton Heights, is temporary, to be in business for about six months until it can move into the food hall. Other tenants for the food hall have not yet been lined up. (Monday): 4300 Broadway (184th Street), Washington Heights, 917-475-1120. PINTO GARDEN The space that once housed Simpson Wong’s Cafe Asean has become this Thai restaurant from the chef Teerawong Nanthavatsiri. He recently closed his West Village restaurant, Pinto, and opened Pinto Brooklyn Heights early this year. His food represents most regions of Thailand, with specialties like fried chicken wings with Southern Thai spices, a kind of steak tartare called koi neur seasoned with lime and fish sauce, vegetable curry and crab fried rice. A greenhouse garden room can be booked for private events: 117 West 10th Street, (Greenwich Avenue), 212-366-5455, pintogarden.com.SAUCE & BARREL Inventive pizzas and fairly standard pasta dishes and antipasti are served at this 150-seat Lower Manhattan restaurant with a drink roster that includes spritzers, barrel-aged cocktails, wine and beer: 97 Washington Street (Rector Street), 212-480-6800, sauceandbarrel.com.ZUCKER’S BAGELS This Jewish-style appetizing store and deli will be open in time for those who want latkes for Hanukkah, which starts Saturday evening. It’s a third location, after the original in TriBeCa and a Midtown branch. Like most of the menu items, the latkes with different toppings are sold to stay or to take out. The Upper West Side location will feature some new egg sandwiches and have smoked salmon dusted with “everything bagel” seasonings. (Thursday): 273 Columbus Avenue (72nd Street), 212-874-2800, zuckersbagels.com.LUKSUS After three and a half years, this uncommon restaurant, which offers a tasting menu with beer pairings and has won a Michelin star, will close after Dec. 31. It is in the back of Torst, a beer bar serving snacks, which remains open and will expand its food service in the Luksus space. The chef and a partner in Luksus and Torst, Daniel Burns, says he will move on to other projects that will permit him to express his creativity. “I’m really happy to have done things outside the box,” said Mr. Burns, who was a pastry chef at the celebrated Danish restaurant Noma and ran Momofuku’s food lab. Coming up, he has plans for special dinners and will take part in Omnivore, a food event in Paris, in 2017. He also hopes to develop a seasonal gelato shop in New York. “I’ve always had a great passion for it,” he said. His sous-chef, Chuy Cervantes, will take over the cooking at Torst: 615 Manhattan Avenue (Nassau Avenue), Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 718-389-6034, luksusnyc.com.PEARL & ASH This Bowery restaurant closed on Saturday, though the room will still be used for private events. The owners, Branden McRill and Patrick Cappiello, expect to open a similar restaurant in the West Village in about six months.THISTLE HILL TAVERN Dale Talde and his partners have been planning to close this spot in Park Slope, Brooklyn, and they’ve finally done it. The restaurant had its last day on Monday.Advertisement