https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/06/books/review/kudos-rachel-cusk.html
Rachel Cusk Strips the Novel Down to Its Frame. Again. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2162
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Jenny OffillKUDOS By Rachel Cusk 240 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $26In 1963, James Baldwin gave a talk entitled “The Artist’s Struggle for Integrity.” In it, he examined questions of moral and political responsibility, then offered the audience a brief, unnerving explanation of what such integrity means.“Art is here to prove, and to help one bear, the fact that all safety is an illusion.”I thought of this as I finished the last book in Rachel Cusk’s masterly trilogy, which began with “Outline” and continued with “Transit” and now “Kudos.” She is the rare contemporary writer who lives up to Baldwin’s credo, but her work doesn’t lend itself to conventional summaries of plot or character. All three are narrated in the first person by a writer named Faye whose former life has gone up in flames, but they’re not about how or why the fire started. Instead, the novels describe in precise and haunting detail what it’s like to walk through the world, trailing ashes behind you. Most of us look away from such people. We don’t want to believe our houses could burn down too.From the beginning, the subtlety and brilliance of Cusk’s project arises from her decision not to foreground Faye’s specific loss. This allows her to open it out into a more universal field. She does this by having Faye adopt a stance of radical passivity, listening to the stories of everyone she meets while keeping her own largely untold. There is a startling quality to this reserve in the beginning. It feels distinctly unmodern. I spent the first part of “Outline” waiting for the narrator to emerge from the shadows and the second part wondering what it would mean if she did.We are no longer used to the sort of self-effacement Faye practices and yet it is found in the mystic traditions of nearly all religions. Withdrawal from the clamor of human concerns was often prescribed as a spiritual corrective in difficult times. The Desert Fathers fled to their cells in the wilderness; the Taoists had their dark retreats. But the wilderness Faye is wandering through at the beginning of the trilogy is particular to her as a writer. She no longer believes in stories.This is because the tranquilizing illusions of her old life are gone, but nothing has yet arisen to take their place. She is balanced between the no more and the not yet. And so the considerable emotional velocity of the first two volumes springs from an unlikely source. We don’t wonder what will happen in Faye’s story. We wonder if she will tell it all.It is hard to overstate the difficulty of the technique Cusk has chosen. It is as if a dressmaker had disavowed fabric in order to make clothes out of air instead. Narrative is so central to the way human beings describe and understand their world that there is a whole branch of psychology devoted to it. Narrative psychologists have noted that by the time people reach old age the majority have organized their life stories in one of two ways: It all came to nothing in the end, one person might conclude, while another will claim that It all came together in the end. These story arcs are so common that they have been given names. The first is called the contamination narrative, the second the redemptive narrative.In her travels, Faye hears many tales that follow these familiar trajectories. She absorbs them from everyone she encounters, be they real estate agents or housebuilders or world-famous novelists. Only once, in the first book, does she meet someone else who has also given up on stories. The woman, a playwright named Anne, admits that she has found herself unable to write ever since she was violently mugged. In words that seem to mirror the reasons for Faye’s own reticence, Anne says that in the aftermath of her trauma, “she lacked what might be called a vocabulary, a native language of self.”This is a fascinating idea. A true one, I think. It suggests that a person can become so unbounded by pain that he or she is no longer able to marshal the usual meaning-making apparatus. And yet it appears to be an extraordinarily rare condition in the world Faye moves through. Everywhere she goes she meets undaunted monologuists, people whose sense of an underlying narrative remains intact no matter how many changes of fortune they experience. What the tellers all have in common is that they believe that there were turning points in their stories, moments where a decision they made led to the desired or feared outcome. At times, Faye gently or forcefully challenges these retroactive assignments of meaning, but to no avail. Part of the wonderful deadpan humor of the novels is that no matter how logical her objections are, no one ever revises his or her story.What she seems to find most delusional in her fellow travelers is their sense of their own agency. Faye’s own ideas gesture toward something darker and stranger. In “Outline,” she wonders if it is possible “that one forges one’s own destiny by what one doesn’t notice or feel compassion for; that what you don’t know and don’t make the effort to understand will become the very thing you are forced into knowledge of.”Her companion jokes that only someone raised Catholic could come up with such a terrible idea, but in fact it has many interesting echoes. There is something here of Jung’s description of “shadow” life in which any aspect that isn’t being attended to will increase in power and magnetism. Here too is a tinge of Freud’s disheartening observation that people seem compelled to repeat and re-enact their unhappiest moments in different guises. Perhaps most of all this idea of being “forced into knowledge” is reminiscent of the reversals and recognitions found in Greek tragedies. Faye’s fatalist bent is an unpopular one in the modern Western world. Few people want to believe that they arrive at rather than create their own fate.More common is a desire to subscribe to something called the just world fallacy, which is the tendency to rationalize fortune or misfortune by believing that people get what they deserve and deserve what they get. This is a reassuring theory and one that seems newly ascendant in this age of scapegoating and fear-mongering. Its main selling point is that it keeps the existential wind from blowing in. You can continue to believe that you are safe, that you deserve to be, right up to the moment you find yourself abruptly unhoused and thrust out into the rain with your fellow human beings.The profound thrill of Cusk’s work is that she has no such illusions. She is deeply interested in the question of suffering, of whether or not there is value to it, and in this novel, she signals her inquiry right out of the gate. In modern usage, the word “kudos” means “prizes,” but originally, Cusk says, it connoted an honor or recognition that could be falsely claimed. This adds a disquieting note to the old Greek idea that “we suffer unto truth.” Even if this is the case, should we expect such insight to be consoling? Should we expect to be rewarded for surviving our ordeal? For telling other people about it?Faye faces this question directly in “Kudos.” At a literary festival, she finds herself being interviewed by a woman she met once years before. This woman told her then of her ordered and seemingly idyllic family life in a small town where the hours were marked by the ringing of beautiful bells. The description has stayed with Faye; it has troubled her and she tries to explain why to the interviewer.“She had talked, I said, about her husband and two sons and about the simple, regulated life they lived, a life that involved little change and hence little waste, and the fact that in certain details her life had mirrored my own while in no way resembling it, had often led me to see my own situation in the most unflattering light. I had broken that mirror, I said, without knowing if I had done so as an act of violence or simply by mistake. Suffering has always appeared to me as an opportunity, I said, and I wasn’t sure if I would ever discover whether this was true and if so why it was, because so far I had failed to understand what it might be an opportunity for. All I knew was that it carried a kind of honor, if you survived it, and left you in a relationship to the truth that seemed closer, but that in fact might have been identical to the truthfulness of staying in one place.”The interviewer then tells how her own orderly story started to collapse until one day, stricken by loss herself, she found herself alone in the square listening to the famous bells. They rang for longer than she had ever heard them ring and their music seemed to become wilder and wilder, more and more nonsensical. It was raining and water streamed down her face, but she couldn’t make herself leave until the cacophony ended. It’s not entirely clear what happened to her that day. Did the sound of the bells change? Or had she suffered sufficiently that she could now hear another kind of music?Cusk doesn’t answer such questions directly. She doesn’t need to. In the course of this unforgettable trilogy, she has proved they are the same bells.An earlier version of this review misstated the source for the quotation beginning “that one forges one’s own destiny.” It is from “Outline,” not “Transit.”Jenny Offill’s most recent novel is “Dept. of Speculation.”Advertisement