https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/arts/television/one-season-wednesdays-tv.html
One-Season Wednesdays: ‘Aliens in America’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1657
AdvertisementSupported bysummer watchingEvery Wednesday this summer, we’ll be recommending a one-season show for low-commitment, high-enjoyment summer viewing. Updated weekly.By Watching Staff“Aliens in America” debuted on the CW in 2007, when comedies were in a weird place. That was the fall when “Cavemen” also debuted on ABC, when “Two and a Half Men” was still dominating the CBS comedy lineup, when “Entourage” was still being nominated for Emmys, when “Desperate Housewives” was competing as a comedy. Not long, and yet very long ago. So a sitcom about a Muslim Pakistani exchange student who finds himself living with a white, nominally Christian family in Wisconsin — airing on a network that was only a year old — did not make the impression it perhaps could have.“Aliens” aired just 18 episodes. Absolutely skip the first three, where the show is at its most expository and labored, and just know this: Justin (Dan Byrd), our narrator, is a high school dorkus whose social life is so crummy that his mother, Franny (Amy Pietz), agrees to house a foreign exchange student, Raja (Adhir Kalyan), in the hopes that Justin will make a friend and gain some social footing. It sort of works. Justin remains at the very bottom of the social ladder, but he and Raja are instantly and sweetly best friends.The show is often called a “fish out of water story,” but that’s not quite right. There’s no water, or maybe no fish: No one here is totally comfortable, and none of the characters find their environment completely suitable. Franny is frustrated by her family’s indifference to her (sometimes smothering) efforts. Her husband, Gary (Scott Patterson), loses his job and, with it, his identity. Their daughter, Claire (Lindsey Shaw), thrives on the cutthroat popularity game, but she also craves more meaningful validation. Justin refers to himself as an alien, having no idea how to fit in better.So “Aliens” is really just a family comedy. It has a lot in common with “The Goldbergs” or “Fresh Off the Boat,” right down to the not-always-necessary narration, the clear sibling roles, the contrived but deeply revered suburban rituals.Raja faces racism and Islamaphobia frequently throughout the series, and the show addresses it on multiple fronts, including by criticizing its own characters’ ignorance. He is a religious kid, but he also uses his own religiosity as a social shield to avoid some of the more anxiety-inducing aspects of adolescence. He reminds me of other quintessential fastidious teen characters, like Brian Krakow of “My So-Called Life” or Alex on “Modern Family” — high-achieving rule-followers who sometimes feel let down by society’s decrepitude.Revisiting the show this week, I was struck by how darling it is, how gently it regards that floppy, scary, badly dressed, constantly stressed time of teenhood, when boys wear the ugliest sandals on earth and eat 17 cupcakes in a sitting. (I was also struck by the occasional use of the word retarded, a term that has rightly been banished since the show aired.)While the show lacks the grander pathos of “Freaks and Geeks,” it hits similar beats: the dangerous allure of being the school mascot, for example, or the degree to which one outfit can ruin everything, or just the simple, humiliating horniness of being alive. If you like your shows earnest and your outlooks hopeful, give “Aliens in America” a try. — Margaret LyonsWHERE TO WATCH: CW Seed (it’s free)TIME COMMITMENT: 15 half-hour episodes; it’s an 18-episode season, but skip the first three.When Anthony Bourdain died in June, I spent some time scouring the internet for everything Bourdain-related I could find. This led me to his first piece for The New Yorker, old episodes of “Parts Unknown” and “Kitchen Confidential.” Not the best-selling memoir — the much less successful, from a commercial standpoint, TV adaptation that ran for less than a single season in 2005. Fox only aired four of the show’s 13 episodes, and some might not make it past the shot in the opening credits of a bra hanging among kitchen pans. But give it a chance — it is truly, madly, deeply peak mid-’00s TV, and I love it.The show centers on Jack Bourdain, a recovering addict and fallen culinary wunderkind played by a baby-faced Bradley Cooper. His Bourdain has a sleazy kind of charm, sporting a leather thong necklace and a narcissistic streak a mile wide. The show opens with him assembling old friends and frenemies to staff a new kitchen (funny you should ask, “Ocean’s Eleven” was indeed released a few years earlier).This ensemble cast is where “Kitchen Confidential” really shines: John Cho, Nicholas Brendon, Jaime King, John Francis Daley and Bonnie Somerville have great chemistry and alternately squabble, flirt and get up to high jinks against the backdrop of the glitzy Manhattan restaurant scene. (One episode is focused around the star power of Lindsay Lohan’s dog.)Darren Star is a producer and the show owes a lot to his “Sex and the City,” which aired its final episode the year before “Kitchen Confidential” debuted. Both have a jaunty backing track, a droll voice-over and a provocative lead who feels strangely innocuous viewed from 2018.The show also retains some of the wit and edge of the real Bourdain’s voice, with story lines on the awfulness of brunch and how a kitchen is like a submarine, both pulled straight from the New Yorker piece that became the memoir. If your heart is still aching after his death or you’re just looking for a low-commitment workplace comedy, give “Kitchen Confidential” a try. — Eleanor StanfordWHERE TO WATCH: HuluCOMMITMENT LEVEL: 13 half-hour episodes, but it finds its feet around Episode 4.Do you ever feel like you’re being gaslit by members of the underworld? Then look no further than this demon-hunting comedy on Netflix, by way of Channel 4, which offers a roadmap for women navigating personal, and actual, demons.In “Crazyhead,” Susan Wokoma and Cara Theobold star as Raquel and Amy, two young women in Bristol who have the ability to see the malevolent, supernatural beings who walk among us. Since this isn’t a common gift, they are treated as if they were unwell, resulting in both having a justified skepticism of prescription-happy doctors and psychiatric institutions. This all helps to cement their friendship. Fast.Which is good, because the demons, who occupy Southwest England have been up to no good. It’s a fast-paced romp through bowling alleys and night clubs, full of scatological, dark humor.The show has been called “the British Buffy,” but classifying it isn’t that easy. Raquel, who guides Amy to discover her powers, is a Pilates-loving nerd with a penchant for letterman jackets. A black woman leading the charge, she is not afraid to be openly messy, friendless and vulnerable. She’s also very funny, and lightning-quick with her telescopic baton when demons are nearby. Wokoma, who stole our hearts as the Jesus-loving sister in “Chewing Gum,” plays her as the Buffy we should have had the first time around.Produced by Howard Overman, the creator of “Misfits,” the show passes the Bechdel test with flying colors, although its jokes about sexuality can fall flat. Still, “Crazyhead” fills a serious need for female-led sci-fi shows, as evidenced by a Change.org petition last year begging for a second season. — Kathleen MassaraWHERE TO WATCH: NetflixCOMMITMENT LEVEL: Low-ish. Six 45-minute episodes.Our picks for One-Season Wednesdays have usually been shows you might have missed a few years ago. Here, for a change, is a great show that was airing just two weeks ago, but chances are you weren’t watching it. Fox’s “Ghosted,” a charming series that was part paranormal police procedural, part workplace sitcom, ended its first and, as far as we know, only season on July 22.During its short life it had an onerous distinction: It was jerked around in a classic broadcast-network fashion that we’re less used to seeing in the short-season, streaming era. Fox seemed to be in the show’s corner after it debuted last fall, announcing an order for an additional six episodes (bringing the total to 16). But in January it yanked the show from the schedule for six months, burning off the extra episodes this summer.The first nine weeks were an “X-Files” parody involving mismatched partners solving wacky-alien cases of the week. But then, Fox switched showrunners midstream — Paul Lieberstein, an “Office” alumnus, replaced Kevin Etten — and “Ghosted” ended up being two different series in a single season. The final six episodes dropped the existing plot lines for a more serialized and naturalistic comedy about office underdogs. The result is a season that is not a natural binge, but each of the two sections of the season works on its own terms, centered as they both are on the comic teamwork of Craig Robinson and Adam Scott, who play a police detective turned mall cop and a physics professor turned bookstore clerk. Recruited to a clandestine government E.T.-hunting agency, they’re a low-rent Scully and Mulder with something to prove, and Robinson and Scott are equally funny in the season’s more raucous first half and its more melancholy second.If Fox can give “Last Man Standing” a new home, maybe there’s someone out there (Crackle, are you listening?) who would be willing to take “Ghosted” out of the one-season category. — Mike HaleWHERE TO WATCH: HuluCOMMITMENT LEVEL: Medium; 16 half-hour episodesRemember that time that Baz Luhrmann, the Australian filmmaker famed for his indulgence of dizzying pastiche in “Romeo + Juliet” and “Moulin Rouge,” decided to create a series about the last days of disco, the birth of hip-hop and political corruption in the Bronx? No, it was not the stuff mad libs are made of. It was Netflix’s “The Get Down,” a musical extravaganza set during the late ’70s, which has an impressive ensemble of reliable character actors and vibrant newcomers — and a sick soundtrack.At the center of this delightful pop opera are two young dreamers: Mylene (Herizen F. Guardiola), a pastor’s daughter torn between abiding by her strict religious upbringing and becoming the next Donna Summer, and Ezekiel (Justice Smith), a smart poet who aspires to escape the Bronx. Guardiola and Smith make a convincing pair as high school kids in love, evoking all the awkwardness and uncertainty of their age. They play against a backdrop of story lines touching on race, class and religion (for starters) with a sensory overload of elaborate production numbers, cultural references (Star Wars, kung fu, Grandmaster Flash) and wildly alternating cinematic styles.Fair warning: The first episode, the only one directed by Luhrmann, is an overstuffed slog that lacks focus and energy for most of its 75 minute run time. (The editing is puzzlingly sloppy, to boot.) But if you can get past that hump, “The Get Down” begins to find its groove by the third episode and continues to burn fast and hot right up to its conclusion — so much so that it’s not too surprising it didn’t survive to see a second season. (Season 1 cost around $120 million, according to multiple news reports.) Beneath the Luhrmann flash and spectacle, which occasionally gets in the way, lies an earnest, endearing plea for the appreciation of hip-hop’s origins that’s impossible to deny. — Aisha HarrisWHERE TO WATCH: NetflixCOMMITMENT LEVEL: Medium. 11 episodes, most of which hover around an hour long.I’ll admit my bias up front: I love John Cho. I think he is a fine actor who is also quite charming and extremely good looking! I would watch anything that cast him as a romantic lead. And that is pretty much exclusively the short-lived 2014 ABC sitcom “Selfie.”“Selfie” is ostensibly a “My Fair Lady” update set in the offices of a children’s pharmaceutical company. Cho plays Henry Higgs, a stuffy marketing guru tasked with rebranding Karen Gillan’s Eliza Dooley, a social-media famous sales rep who can’t socialize in real life. The premise is silly, and the internet references were stale even four years ago. But the show’s charms reveal themselves as the relationship between the leads transcends those priors.“Selfie” is about the acts we put on to distance ourselves from one another, online and off, but once the show allows Cho and Gillan to get close, they spark. Things really get going around Episode 6, in which Eliza and Henry touch, in a sexy way, for the first time, then recoil back into their defensive poses. At which point: ABC promptly canceled the show. But on Hulu, you can watch the remainder of the first truncated season and marinate in their will-they-or-won’t-they thing for a full 13 episodes.Is “Selfie” a great show? It is not. But through the first season, Cho and Gillan build a strong prototype of what could have become one. In 2016, the digital strategist William Yu launched the internet campaign #StarringJohnCho, which edited the actor’s image into all the starring roles Hollywood denies him and other Asian actors — here’s Cho suited in “Avengers” gear, striking James Bond poses, laughing in rom-com posters. “Selfie” is a little like that — a mirage of what might have been. — Amanda HessWHERE TO WATCH: Stream it on Hulu.COMMITMENT LEVEL: Low-ish. 13 half-hour episodes.“Kings” was just too ambitious for broadcast television. The short-lived NBC series — 13 hourlong installments aired during the network’s sleepy spring and summer months in 2009 — had the grandeur of opera, the aspiration of Shakespearean drama and, well, the budget of a network that clearly wasn’t interested in making a major investment.This show might also have been too weird. It transported the biblical story of David to a world that looked a lot like America in 2009, but it was accented with motifs found in dystopian futuristic fantasies, such as a “Hunger Games”-like decadence in the capital city. Beyond that, it was vaguely religious, with frequent, jarring mentions of God and sincere invocations of divine right.Yet it’s utterly binge-worthy, and perfect summer-watching fun.After all, what operatic plot isn’t? There’s palace intrigue, young love, closeted homosexuality, illegitimate children, war, assassination — the list goes on, much of it absurd, such as a kaleidoscope of monarch butterflies that land on David’s head like a crown. (Get it?) Prepare yourself, though: This show was canceled before the writers could achieve much resolution. For the nearly 10 years since the season finale, I’ve been wondering what happened to David, who was hapless yet destined for great things.It’s been a joy to revisit “Kings” recently, not only for the delicious plot but also for the fun of trying to figure out its filming locations, like watching a Nora Ephron or Woody Allen movie. The series takes place in a city called Shiloh, but it’s clearly just New York with the Empire State Building edited out and a few glossy skyscrapers added in.When the show was new, I was early in my college career and still a green New Yorker. Now, it’s amusing to try to make sense of the geography of Shiloh, where the King’s palace is somehow the Apthorp Building, the New York Public Library, the Union Theological Seminary and even the Appel Room at Jazz at Lincoln Center all at once. There are more city sights you’ll be delighted to see, but you’ll have to watch the series yourself to find them. — Joshua BaroneWHERE TO WATCH: Stream on NBC.com, buy episodes on Amazon or iTunes.COMMITMENT LEVEL: Medium: 11 hourlong episodes and a feature-length pilot.Filled with irreverent jokes fired like fastballs, the 13 episodes of this Fox comedy are a breeze to binge and are smartly satisfying, even as they leave a bitter aftertaste. “Action” debuted in 1999, placing it a few years (and a few bleeps) too ahead of its time to last longer than a single season on broadcast TV. But the audacity of its satire, which skewered the very Hollywood industry that created it, is still surprising, even now.Jay Mohr stars as Peter Dragon, a Hollywood movie producer who is reeling from an action-movie flop and in desperate need of a hit. That means the frequent demeaning of others and himself as he fights to stay on top: He’s queasily lecherous, he’s conniving, and he’s perfectly willing to throw a colleague to the wolves in order to make a deal.Some scenes play even more uncomfortably today in light of the real Hollywood behavior exposed by the #MeToo movement. (One scene has Salma Hayek, playing herself, berating Peter because he asked her to take off her shirt in an audition to play a nun.) But the intelligence of the show’s writing, the economy of its pacing and the all-in spirit of its performers make for a fearless attempt by Hollywood to offer a look under its own hood. — Mekado MurphyWHERE TO WATCH: Purchase episodes on iTunes COMMITMENT LEVEL: Medium, 13 half-hour episodesIn an early episode of the ironically titled “Trophy Wife,” Kate Harrison (Malin Akerman) and her much older husband, Pete (Bradley Whitford), lie on either side of Bert, Pete’s son from a second marriage. Pete checks off Bert’s pre-sleep requirements: Bert’s water is on the nightstand, as is his bear’s water; Pete has finished reading a book to him; and Bert’s outfits for the week are folded on a chair. Pete begins to count down from 10 and Bert, played by the charming Albert Tsai, insists he count down from 500 instead. Once Bert’s eyes are finally closed, Pete and Kate furtively roll off the bed and army-crawl their way out of the room.Later in the week, Kate, who feels like a “weird Craigslist roommate” living with Pete and his three children from two previous marriages, tells Pete she wants more parental responsibilities. So he offers her a herculean task: putting Bert to sleep.Of course, everything goes awry, beginning with Bert’s refusal to shut off, even after Kate counts backward from a million and lets him stay up to watch an intense documentary — prompting him to wonder aloud the next day whether his uterus could ever be stolen. “Trophy Wife” is full of arcs like this: good, clean comedy in the style of “Modern Family,” with humor that ranges from silly to absurd. Most of the main plot lines center on Kate’s struggle to define her role in a family that includes the precocious and cheeky Bert (“I get a horndog?” he exclaims when his parents buy him a puppy, having overheard a word he shouldn’t), as well as two teenagers and two ex-wives: Diane Buckley (Marcia Gay Harden), a no-nonsense surgeon with an unmatched talent for beer pong, and Jackie Fisher (Michaela Watkins), an obsessive yoga-meditation-reiki-farmers’-market lover with no interest in boundaries.Harden is elegant in her role, and Watkins, who has since made a name for herself as the lead in “Casual,” shines with weirdness. The kids have plenty of their own story lines, and although Kate, Jackie and Diane periodically come into light conflict, there’s no acrimony — at times, the three are something akin to friends. It’s simple fun with some raunchy side-eye, and it leaves me feeling optimistic that even the strangest family dynamics can work out. — Valeriya SafronovaWHERE TO WATCH: Purchase episodes on Amazon or iTunes.COMMITMENT LEVEL: Medium to high; 22 half-hour episodes.Here is what you can expect from the first five minutes of “Swingtown,” a one-season fantasy that opens in July 1976. With “Your Love Is Lifting Me Higher” as the backing track, you get: a simulated simulated sex act; a simulated actual sex act; the sentence “My wife is going to love you”; Grant Show, bred in a lab for just this role, sporting a pornstache and a white tank top; a large can of Tab with a soft aluminum pull; a threesome; Lana Parrilla; the sentence “I feel like I’m ready for the next thing.”Yes, five minutes into this show, which aired on CB-freaking-S, you will know that the 99 cents you spent for the episode would have been a bargain at twice the price. The fun starts when Bruce (Jack Davenport) and Susan (Molly Parker) move their family (which includes a daughter named Laurie and a son named B.J.) to a fancier part of Chicago. They move right across the street from Tom and Trina (Show and Parrilla), who eye them like predators from the house across the street. The deal is basically done when Tom and Trina show up with a bottle of champagne the night the family moves in — and in matching red tops and white short shorts — to welcome them to the neighborhood and invite them to a party. I think I spoil nothing when I say that the party will include a great big basement orgy.The episode goes on to include: a Harvey Wallbanger; a glass of Chablis; the line dance where you roll your hands; polyester halter dresses; the phrase “We missed the whole Woodstock counterculture thing”; the response “The train is still boarding”; cocaine being done with $100 bill; cocaine being rubbed on the gums; sunglasses that start dark but fade toward the bottom; quaaludes; hair so feathered that it might take off at the next breeze; did I mention the basement orgy?But for all its flamboyance and audacity, “Swingtown” does a good job of exploring a generation of people who aren’t quite sure why they fell for the traditional value of marriage, which (like swinging, to me at least), seems like more trouble than it’s worth. It’s a meditation on conservatism, risk, values, fidelity and aging. And swinging.Why did it have to die? Why was it pulled away from us too soon? Why was it gone before it could answer the question of whether people who have key parties bought the fishbowl just for the key party or if there was a dead fish in its past? “Swingtown” was a midseason replacement in the summer of 2008. Entities like the American Family Association and Parents Television Council wrote strongly worded letters to CBS to try to get a boycott going. Man, I miss those swingers. There were cliffhangers in the season finale that I still think about. Mostly I’m grateful for “Swingtown” because it allows me to continue to participate in my fantasy that I think we all share about swingers, which is that all they think about is swinging — that it consumes their every day, that their lives are built around it.I’m pretty sure the denizens of “Swingtown” would agree with me when I say that I don’t think guilty pleasures exist. Pleasure exists — I know they’d agree with me about that. But I beg you, do not feel guilty about the pleasure that “Swingtown” can bring you over the course of its 13 delicious hours. So go stream the season. Where else can you find an orgy for 99 cents? On second thought, don’t answer that. — Taffy Brodesser-AknerWHERE TO WATCH: iTunes, VuduCOMMITMENT LEVEL: High-ish (much like the characters.) 13 hourlong episodes. Amy Sherman-Palladino’s “Gilmore Girls” is done (for now, anyway). Her Golden Globe-winning “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” remains with us, but you’ll need to cool your heels until it returns for its second season. But fans of those shows’ effervescent wit and whimsy need not live in a state of Amy Sherman-Palladenial. Like its predecessor and successor, this 2012-13 ABC Family (R.I.P.) series is a show about starting over. Here, it’s Michelle (the Broadway veteran Sutton Foster) going through upheaval. A classically trained ballerina stranded in a Vegas chorus line, she winds up — through a first-episode twist I won’t spoil — alone and jobless in the small town of Paradise, Calif., teaching dance.In some surface ways, “Bunheads” plays like a “Gilmore” revival. Paradise is more or less Stars Hollow but warmer (meteorologically and culturally). The cast includes Kelly Bishop as Fanny Flowers, the imperious dance teacher who takes Michelle on; other familiar “Gilmore” faces include Liza Weil and Sean Gunn in a cameo as a haughty barista. (Also a recurring favorite from “Gilmore Girls”: coffee.) But the true secret weapons of “Bunheads” are the four teenage students whom Michelle and Fanny mentor, whose show the series gradually becomes. Artistic aspiration and teen coming-of-age are two bittersweet tastes that taste great together, each with its own flavor profile of longing, rejection and fumbling toward identity. Also, not for nothing in a series about dance, the choreography is on point, or rather en pointe (this routine, especially).It helps to enjoy the eccentricity and precocity of Ms. Sherman-Palladino’s dialogue (everyone is precocious in her shows, even the elderly). But “Bunheads” is also a good introduction to her style, and — thanks to its woefully short run — a refreshing 18-episode summer binge. If you like your fast-talking cleverness cut with melancholy, hoof it, don’t walk, to “Bunheads.” — James PoniewozikWHERE TO WATCH: Hulu. COMMITMENT LEVEL: High (by single-season standards). 18 hourlong episodes.This German series (with English subtitles) clocks in at only eight episodes, and it’s too intense to binge; don’t watch more than two at a time unless you want to feel extremely trashola about everything. That’s not to say the show is wall-to-wall violence — it’s not, and there are poppy, fun moments, and sweet and silly ones. But a lot of brutality and sorrow, too. The show is, as you might expect, set in a divided Germany in 1983. Martin (Jonas Nay) is a young East German soldier with the odd luck of looking a lot like a West German soldier named Moritz, who is preparing to become an aide to a powerful general. East German forces kill Moritz, and Martin is recruited to pose as him in West Berlin, thus collecting all kinds of valuable intelligence.Unlike the spies in most stories, Martin is largely mediocre. In one memorable training montage, he can barely learn how to hand off small parcels discreetly. He’s also utterly taken with the food and music and culture of West Berlin. But he’s not there for shenanigans, and his responsibilities to his country, his family and himself sometimes pull him in opposing directions. This is further complicated by the fact that his aunt is one of his Stasi bosses.As befits an excellent period drama, the costuming here is terrific, especially on the characters who are consciously, openly stylish. (Sure, there are lots of well-dressed characters on TV, but they don’t always seem as if they were actually dressing themselves.) It’s part of the careful humanity of the show, its deliberateness about the personality of each character. If you like ’80s jams and spies, or if you like coming-of-age stories that are not about road trips, try this. (A second season, called “Deutschland 86,” is scheduled for later this year on Sundance TV.) — Margaret LyonsWHERE TO WATCH: Hulu. COMMITMENT LEVEL: Medium. Eight hourlong episodes. Before Phoebe Waller-Bridge created the hit assassin thriller “Killing Eve,” she created and starred in the dark, hilarious “Fleabag,” about a woman who’s grieving the death of her best friend. And just before that, she created and starred in “Crashing,” an ensemble comedy about a group of 20-somethings living in a legal squat in an old hospital.In “Crashing,” Waller-Bridge plays Lulu, a luminous troublemaker who moves into the hospital to follow her old friend Anthony, who lives there with his uptight fiancée, Kate. This of course creates tension. There’s also the moody French artist Melody, the sex-crazed and often offensive Sam, and the lovable, anxious Fred.Lulu sees herself as cool and whimsical, but she’s really just callous and irresponsible. When she shows up with her ukulele in tow, strumming improvised songs, Kate is immediately a little put off. “Wow, quirky!” she says. “Thanks, I try really hard,” Lulu jokes. Well, sort of jokes. Lulu is the quintessence of the kind of woman other women see as artificial but men see as charming, and Waller-Bridge devilishly plays with these types and conventions in interesting but still empathetic ways.There’s an abundance of love and romance and sex on “Crashing,” much of it completely charming. There’s also genuine friction among the characters, along with struggles to set healthy boundaries and to be decent people.If you like hopeful shows about bitter characters, or like me, you share a passion for Dinner Party Gone Bad stories, try this. — Margaret LyonsWHERE TO WATCH: Netflix. COMMITMENT LEVEL: Low. Six half-hour episodes.If you want to expand your options without limiting yourself to a certain number of seasons, we have so many wonderful recommendations over on the Watching website, where we have hand-selected more than 1,000 of our absolute favorite shows and movies.Advertisement