https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/05/smarter-living/how-to-win-at-winter.html
How to Win at Winter When You Hate Winter - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1479
AdvertisementSupported byBy Lori MooreMy first winter in the Northeast, I thought I was set.When I was growing up in the South, the heaviest coat I ever owned was a corduroy pea coat — more of a jacket, really. But after a year of working in the powdery mountain snow out West, I moved to New York City with a heavy Patagonia fleece, a knit hat or two, and a pair of gloves. Nothing could faze me after 20-foot snowdrifts, so I thought.Then the first sloppy nor’easter snowstorm hit. My fleece and hat were soaked, and the windbreaker I had worn over them on zero-degree days in the arid mountains was no shield for the wet East Coast snow.I found myself raging at winter, which seemed to never end. Long after the date I was used to greeting the spring, snow was still falling.In short, I hated winter when I first moved north. But now, I find myself looking forward to it. It took over a decade, but I have learned ways to not just deal with the coldest season but to seek out the joys of it.Sure, winter has problems: The days are short, the temperatures piercing, and flu season knows no mercy. But there are ways to make it through.First things first: Learn how to dress for the weather.Layering and solid outerwear are key. Though it’s frigid outside, every restaurant, office building and mode of public transportation will be Serengeti hot, so you’ll want to escape from those top layers quickly.Check your coat. I came into this chillscape believing I could survive on layers alone, but I now tactically match my outerwear to the temperature. For me, that means wool coats top out at around 40 degrees, short down jackets take me to the freezing point, and anything below that requires a full-length parka. With this philosophy, it takes some hits and misses to find your personal threshold.While I give up on fashion from December through mid-April, Mary Lou Andre, a wardrobe and image consultant based in Boston, does not believe that’s necessary. She offers a different strategy for presenting yourself well while staying warm: Smart layering with a high-quality coat.Ms. Andre, who is also an author, advises her clients to take stock of their lifestyle, then organize what they already own and add what is needed. You want to “have your clothing work for you,” she said. “If less is more, it’s O.K. to get a coat that you love and to pay more.”Investing in one or two high-quality pieces of outerwear that fit your lifestyle — career or casual — can keep you warm for years to come, she said. And sales are abundant, so it’s almost never necessary to pay full price.She recommends building outerwear around a neutral color — an all-black collection of warm shoes or a taupe coat, for example — and playing around with a few fun additions. Men’s boots — look for waterproof or add your own Scotchguard — are having a fashion moment, she said, and lots of men’s coats now come with zip-in, zip-out extra layers of warmth.Fabric is essential. Layer with long silk underwear or, for women, allow tights the double duty of warming up that summer shift dress or acting as a barrier under scratchy wool pants. And for wool coats, the softer the feel, the higher the quality, which will provide more warmth.It takes time and some experimenting to find what gets you through, so don’t get frustrated. Our friends at the Wirecutter, a New York Times company that reviews and recommends products, have tested the best base layers for women and for men to guide you.So work it out.Raising your heart rate is a great way to generate warmth and improve your outlook, but a lot of people abandon healthy pursuits when the temperature drops.“Getting outside and finding something you enjoy is critical,” said Jonathan Ross, a personal trainer and author in the Washington D.C. area. “If we think of winter as something that is going to be miserable, it is.”Mr. Ross, who developed the Funtensity workout, said exercise not only keeps off extra pounds but also helps people maintain a positive energy and attitude, making the winter easier to face. The gym is fine, but he recommends that a cold-weather newbie get outside and embrace the crisp air with a hike or a brisk walk.Someone experiencing a first true winter should commit to trying something new. Ice skating, for instance, is a low-commitment activity that exploits the season.Wherever you exercise, there are two key points to keep in mind, Mr. Ross said. First, take your time.“It’s important to make sure not to have an all-or-nothing approach to exercise, especially this time of year,” he said. If you are just figuring out winter, it’s better not to pressure yourself to also adjust to an overly intense new workout.The second point: Have fun, or you’re not likely to stick with it.“One rule that works for all people is that we like to do things we enjoy,” he said.So stay inside.Sheltering in place from the cold can be fun and productive. Cuddle up with a loved one, or with a good book. (An appropriate topic? The Danish concept of Hygge, which “roughly translates to ‘coziness’ and ‘well-being’ and encompasses an entire way of living that promises warmth, safety and, most important, community.”)Winter is prime binge-watching season. Find the movie or series you’ve been wanting to explore, pop the popcorn and dive in. Times Watching can help you set your screen goals. Start with this guide for where to stream the best TV shows of 2017.Take this self-imposed house arrest to organize your space, or finish unpacking, to ward off the blahs.“Visual clutter equals mental clutter,” said Debbie Harwin, a professional organizer in the greater New York City area. “It impacts your mood, it impacts everything. It has a tremendous impact — when looking at that every day — psychologically to clean that out.”Prioritize one bite-size task, and tackle it in a day, she said. Your coat closet could be a good start.“With the onset of winter comes extra stuff — scarves, clogs, hats, hand warmers,” Ms. Harwin said. “Coming from a warm climate, you’re not used to all that and the space it takes up.”Ms. Harwin, suggested storing warm accessories like hats in individual bins for each family member, or if room is scarce, tucking gloves and scarves into an over-the-door multi-shoe storage bag.When you have your space in order, you can invite friends over for a board game night or warm meal.So get out.Mr. Ross, the fitness expert, says that when the days are so short, “if you get out in the sun even a little bit, it really improves your mood.” In New York, the Brooklyn Botanic Garden offers monthly outdoor tours called “Chase Away the Winter Blues” from December to March, said Elizabeth Reina-Longoria, director of communications for the gardens.And look for places that bring the outdoors inside.The garden also has five indoor conservatories, including desert and tropical pavilions, which are open year-round. Free tours are offered in the winter every Tuesday, Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday, Ms. Reina-Longoria said.A friend who lives in Seattle once told me she goes to the butterfly house at the Pacific Science Center, where, according to the organization’s website, “it is warm and sunny every day of the year.”There are plenty of social, warm indoor activities waiting for you if you can venture across the tundra to get to them.When the sun disappears, embrace the night. Meet up with friends; check out a bowling alley, find bars with a fireplace, watch a movie on the big screen. (You can start with the flurry of films coming out over the holidays.)And if you can’t brighten the short, darker days, brighten yourself.“If you dread winter here, grab a really happy color in a scarf, in a glove, in a hat,” said Ms. Andre, the fashion and image consultant. “There are ways to build a wardrobe with a lot of base neutrals, but you can add a splash of color.”Warm yourself up from the inside.There’s no better time for indulging in cocoa, mulled wine or hot cider than when staving off certain hypothermia. And there’s nothing better than a cozy coffee shop in the winter, with a bonus caffeine jolt for the dark days.After a couple of winters stewing over the weather, I made sport of hunting down New York City’s best hot chocolate. I invited friends along on different legs of the cocoa tour, and found that the fun goal made the cold less of a hindrance to getting there.If the weather’s too blustery to get out and try someone else’s hot chocolate, make your own. Stay in and try your hand at a few new winter recipes: Hearty casseroles and warming winter stews are classics, and pasta dishes are very adaptable for the season. Look for dishes that let you sneak healthy vegetables into your diet. Eating right can help you survive cold and flu season (and here are other steps to protect yourself).Don’t get me wrong: Winter’s a grind, and if you’re breathlessly awaiting the next polar vortex, you’re not my people. Even with my hard-earned optimism about the cold, I’m over it by the time spring comes to the rescue.“You may really want to hunker down and wait for winter to be over, but you can’t do that when it’s three to four months long,” said Mr. Ross, the personal trainer.When it starts to feel as if daylight is only four hours long and the snow is never going to stop blowing, it’s important to remember that there will be an end.And in a few months, you may find yourself craving warm mugs and thick sweaters again.Advertisement