https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/06/us/politics/koch-brothers-republican-super-pac-spending-pays-off.html
 Outside Groups With Deep Pockets Lift G.O.P. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2388
AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicholas ConfessoreLast fall, Steven Law, the president of the nation’s largest Republican “super PAC,” met with two of his party’s biggest donors in a Houston office. Both had given generously to Mr. Law’s organization, American Crossroads, and other Republican outside groups in 2012, when they spent more than $700 million but failed to defeat President Obama or flip the Senate to Republican control. The donors were polite but incredulous.“How is this year going to be any different?” one asked.The donors got their answer on Tuesday, when Republicans won at least seven seats in the Senate, cementing full control of Congress. The election was not only a major victory for the Republican Party, but a pivotal moment for the super PACs and political nonprofit groups that helped the party defeat Democrats across the country.Over the last year and a half, the conservative outside groups retooled and revamped, using lessons in how to exploit voter data, opposition research and advertising learned from their less moneyed but more effective Democratic counterparts during 2012.As federal courts opened new avenues of influence for the wealthy and lenient enforcement effectively neutered what few legal and regulatory restraints remained on big-money politics, they took advantage of every available tool. To shield donors from scrutiny, they moved most of their spending through nonprofit groups not subject to federal disclosure requirements. To be more nimble, they created subsidiaries devoted to specific races. They begged donors for money, overcame internal rivalries that lingered through Election Day, and ultimately deployed at least $300 million in a favorable political environment, helping drive the 2014 midterms to become the costliest in history.All told, the political network overseen by the conservative billionaires Charles G. and David H. Koch appeared to be the largest overall source of outside television spending on behalf of Republicans. Seven Koch-backed groups spent roughly $77 million on television advertising, officials said, including 11 Senate races, and almost double that amount on grass-roots organizing. Koch groups appeared to be the biggest outside spenders on television in Arkansas, Iowa and Louisiana, airing a combined $25 million in ads. Republican candidates won Arkansas and Iowa, and a Republican is favored to win a runoff in Louisiana.American Crossroads and its affiliated nonprofit group spent $50 million on political advertising, and at least $20 million more on so-called issue ads, a spokesman said. The groups dominated outside spending in Alaska, where the Crossroads groups put about $7 million into television advertising, and Colorado, fielding close to $14 million, which helped crush Senator Mark Udall, the Democrat who was once favored to win.All told, Republican outside groups spent about $205 million on television advertising in Senate races, according to a Democrat tracking media purchases, who agreed to share the information on condition of anonymity, while Democratic groups spent $132 million.For many conservative strategists, this election was a dress rehearsal for the next one. Beginning next year, they face the prospect of a formidable presidential contender in Hillary Rodham Clinton and a Democratic Party that is itself quickly mastering the mechanics of unlimited fund-raising.“The key to success in most endeavors, including politics, is learning and adaptation,” said Stuart Stevens, who served as a top strategist to Mitt Romney’s presidential campaign. After Tuesday, Mr. Stevens said, “Republicans have that experience — and it’s an advantage.”The 2014 cycle contained the emergence of a more sophisticated Republican operation for tracking Democratic candidates and scrubbing their public and personal lives for damaging information. During the 2012 campaign, Republican super PACs and outside groups were largely limited to their own in-house research, news reports and footage lifted from television broadcasts or candidates’ own video.This time, Republicans set up a new research hub called America Rising. Created as a limited liability corporation, it could sell footage and research to anyone willing to pay. Republican candidates and super PACs, which otherwise might not coordinate with each other, could buy the same research and tracking footage, allowing their advertising to be more cohesive.The business employed a legion of trackers to follow Democratic candidates, logging close to a half-million miles of travel and recording more than 3,000 campaign events. The group scored an early hit in Iowa, when it obtained footage of Representative Bruce Braley, the Democrats’ anointed Senate contender, disparaging Charles E. Grassley, the ranking Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee, as “a farmer from Iowa, who never went to law school.”The footage was provided to Iowa newspapers in March, putting Mr. Braley on the defensive at time when Republicans had not yet settled on a candidate. Within two days, the video was picked up by a new Republican political nonprofit, Priorities for Iowa, and aired in statewide ads. Ultimately, footage from America Rising was used in more than a hundred Republican ads during the 2014 cycle, according to a spokesman.Republicans also concluded that they had missed opportunities to win Senate seats in 2012 because raucous party primaries had yielded too many candidates who were lacking in polish. This time, the party’s outside allies embarked on an expensive and contentious battle to pick winners.Establishment Republican groups, including Crossroads, worked closely with business allies like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. They also teamed up with smaller, homegrown super PACs in different states. Crossroads helped finance Grow NC Strong, for example, a group supporting Thom Tillis, the North Carolina House speaker, who won on Tuesday. Together, Crossroads and the Koch groups spent almost $24 million on ads bolstering Mr. Tillis or attacking Senator Kay Hagan, the Democratic candidate.The groups also groomed candidates behind the scenes, introducing the most promising contenders to their donors. When Joni Ernst, an Iowa Republican, attended Freedom Partners’ August 2013 donor conference, she was a little-known conservative state senator just weeks into her campaign for the nomination. Within a few months, she was outraising her competitors.Crossroads held its own donor meeting in October 2013, bringing dozens of its top contributors to the Four Seasons hotel in Washington to meet rising stars like Representative Cory Gardner of Colorado. Simultaneously, on Capitol Hill, the Republicans’ Tea Party-inspired conservative wing was leading the party into a disastrous government shutdown.“That’s where I think the product sold itself,” Mr. Law said.But the outside groups also battled fiercely among themselves. Karl Rove, a founder and fund-raiser of Crossroads, would frequently criticize the Koch operation to donors, several Republican strategists said. Attempts at brokering peace failed, and by November, the two camps made little effort to coordinate spending. The constant infighting annoyed the groups’ biggest patrons, including the casino magnate Sheldon G. Adelson.“The infighting became intolerable,” said Andy Abboud, an adviser to Mr. Adelson. “We told them, ‘You either all stop competing, or we’re not doing anything.’ ”To keep the pressure on Democrats, Koch-backed groups began general election-themed advertising in October 2013, earlier than virtually any outside groups ever had. It was a calculated bet: The disastrous opening days for the Obama administration’s new health exchanges, Koch strategists believed, were an ideal time to woo voters with a message about government overreach.“Some consultants would have said, ‘People don’t pay attention before Labor Day,’ ” said Marc Short, president of Freedom Partners, an umbrella organization for donors allied with the Kochs. “We felt like people were focusing on it.”By September, other conservative groups had rebounded. Early last month, Crossroads announced a late fund-raising surge and began pouring cash into a closing assault on Senate Democrats, joining a new super PAC set up by the Koch network.“The financial advantage of an incumbent president able to spend and raise unlimited money is extraordinary,” said Mr. Stevens, the Romney campaign strategist. “That was major factor in 2012 that didn’t exist in this cycle — and won’t in the next.”Advertisement