https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/17/t-magazine/80s-nyc-map.html
New Yorkers and Their ’80s Routines — Block by Block - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1998
AdvertisementSupported byAs told to Kate Guadagnino, Elizabeth Gumport, Merrell Hambleton and Erin SheehyThe era might have been old New York’s last real gasp — a time when the very streets, dirty and unsafe as they were, seemed infused with possibility. Here, notable locals revisit their routes and routines, from lunch on the Upper East to nighttime sojourns to then-emerging neighborhoods like TriBeCa.I returned to New York in ’81 after 10 years as an expat. The old downtown art scene was floundering, while some people, like Robert Mapplethorpe, had risen. Taylor Mead had a running tab at multiple bars. I got a loft at Clinton and Stanton, which was far from fashionable. I loved to walk down Clinton to Delancey — I called it Rue de Rêves because it was filled with bridal shops with garishly colored dresses. The bodegas played loud salsa music late into the night, as Dominican men played dominoes on the corner. The sidewalks along St. Marks over to Astor Place were just as lively — they were a sort of souk where you could buy back what the junkies had stolen from your apartment. Every night was a huge passeggiata with people perusing the blankets. Once I saw someone selling a broken light bulb. After shows at La MaMa, we would go to the gay bar on East Fourth Street and Second Ave. It didn’t have a name. We just called it The Bar, which morphed into Ze Bar, like with a fake French accent. The front window was a queer Mount Rushmore, with the heavyweights looking out onto the street: Rene Ricard, Bill Rice, Peter Hujar, Paul Thek.I was at the same place I am now, 222 Bowery. Nan Goldin was a block up, and William Burroughs lived downstairs. He and I had dinner every night, and a stream of our friends, including Keith Haring and Debbie Harry, would join. When we went out it was to perform. CBGB was just up the street, and I performed there with my band or as a solo poet many times. One place I went to a lot was the St. Marks Baths. I was one of the champions of the golden age of promiscuity, though that all ended with AIDS. I knew people who were dying as early as ’79, and three months later their partners were dead, so by 1981 I had a clear picture, even if it hadn’t fully sunk in, and it was an incredible life changer. It made me immobile.At that time, Chelsea was unexplored territory. There were no movie theaters, bookstores, galleries or photocopy shops, so my entrepreneurial idea, which failed, was to open one, Chelsea Copy. It was right next to the Chelsea Hotel, where I was living. Xerox art was big then, so people would come in to make photocopies and plaster them all over. I was finishing my dissertation and working as the porn critic for the New York Native, so I’d go up to the Adonis at 51st and Eighth and different theaters in Times Square. Across the street from my apartment was the McBurney Y.M.C.A., so that was my gym, and halfway down the block was something called the Squat Theatre, home to an avant-garde Hungarian troupe, and kind of a drug spot. At night, if you headed south through long dark blocks to the meatpacking district, there were clubs and leather bars. My favorite was the Mine Shaft, a very performative kind of sex bar on Little West 12th Street that had a kind of punk, anti-disco vibe.I was living on Eldridge Street between Hester and Grand. It was very close to the Forward Building, which housed the important Yiddish newspaper. My apartment was four stories up, and I got a place on the floor below for Kim Gordon. Thurston Moore would take me to see hardcore groups like Black Flag. Thurston was a scholar. He’s a Leo — all the Leos I know love history. An important place to have breakfast was Buffa’s, on the corner of Lafayette and Prince — you’d see Jim Jarmusch and Jonathan Demme in the booths there.The only place that designated who you were was the Upper East Side. Otherwise neighborhood wasn’t as important as finding a space — one guy I knew, the photographer Patrick McMullan, lived in the coat-check room of a former hotel. You simply traveled to where things were happening. For a while I lived on the Upper West Side, on the parlor floor of a brownstone on 71st Street between Amsterdam and Columbus. Usually I’d take the bus down to Mickey’s [Chinese Chance] at 1 University Place, where Julian Schnabel was the cook. You’d sit at the bar and someone would say: “Hey, we’re going to Danceteria.” Or they’d have a car and you’d find yourself in the East Village, which was a total war zone, with junkies passed out and men building fires in trash cans.I was working at the Whitney and helping to open different museum branches, so I was shuttling between 42nd Street, Stamford, Conn., and the downtown branch, which was just a few blocks from where I lived, on Front Street in the South Street Seaport area. Guerrilla art activities took place all over. Creative Time ran Art on the Beach on the landfill that is now Battery Park City — back then it was just a huge field of sand. The elevated West Side Highway, meanwhile, was a place you could ski. We would get on at the ramp at Chambers Street and ski up to Spring Street to the Ear Inn. One night I saw Jack Smith do a reading, and I can still remember this line, which kind of sums up that era: “The cockroach caravan crosses the rented desert of exotic landlordism.”It was all happening at the same time; there was a lot of yin and yang. I was living with my parents in the Alfred E. Smith projects on the Lower East Side’s waterfront. During the day, I’d get my paints at Canal Hardware or Pearl Paint. I’d work for 12 hours straight, prepping for my show at Barbara Gladstone Gallery. The Mudd Club was one of my favorite spots to go out — that’s where I was introduced to James Chance and the Contortions and Talking Heads. It was in this desolate area between TriBeCa and Chinatown, and I knew every alley. Sometimes, after the clubs got out, people would see a kung fu flick on 42nd Street, which we called the Deuce — We’re going to the Deuce, what’s up? I remember the smell of the theaters so well — popcorn and weed.I lived above a topless club at White and Church. We called the area TriBeCa, but we laughed about it the same way we laughed at DUMBO. Those were developers’ terms. I’d walk to Cooper Union, where I was teaching. Veselka was the go-to place to eat and get cake — the lemon bundt or the mohn. People used to say, “The East Village will be gone when there’s a Gap,” and then, in the late ’80s, one opened on the corner of St. Marks and Second Avenue. The early ’80s were sort of the beginning of serious gentrification.When our gallery, Gracie Mansion, started, both Gracie and I had other jobs, so we would switch off. I’d get to the gallery late afternoon. It was a real neighborhood place, with people dropping in and hanging out, and a sort of day care center for neighbors who wanted us to watch their kids. Next door to my apartment on East Eighth and Avenue C was the Green Oasis Community Garden, and I got involved with that. Up the street from my apartment was 8 B.C., a club run by two friends of mine. You’d have Chinese opera and then some kind of Russian circus act and then a punk band and then a drag queen. It was around the corner from another tiny spot called Chandalier. They were sort of an island unto themselves, and then you went across the park and you had the Pyramid Club and everything else was bars until you got to the Mudd Club way downtown.I got my apartment through Stanley Strychacki, the founder of Club 57. It was at Avenue A and St. Marks Place, but the windows looked out on an air shaft, not the park. A few blocks away was the Ninth Street Bakery. That was the best place to get fresh bread and rugelach and sweets. It was run by very old Jewish folks. Their approach was direct and curt, no frills— not self-consciously art-directed no frills, but Old Country, 19th-century no frills. I really loved those people — the heroism of their everyday lives was palpable, and that was woven into the tapestry of the East Village. I was also a regular at this neighborhood salon presided over by a Mr. Steve, who wore big, Coke-bottle thick glasses and was practically blind. The pictures on the wall were all from the Fifties, and a group of us girls would go and get our hair done in crazy bouffants. I lived and still live in a large duplex at the corner of Park Avenue and 80th Street, in a 1907 building designed by Delano and Aldrich. I was very attached to the Madison Avenue Bookshop, because of my Harvard connection to its owner, Arthur Lehman Loeb, and its excellence. On the east side of Lexington, between 78th and 79th, was the best fishmonger I’ve ever known: Rosedale. The manager, Dorian Mecir, had a heart of gold. She rehabilitated a homeless man who panhandled outside the shop, and he became a model salesman. Madison Pub was an indispensable local dive. It had the best hamburgers and gin martinis. A restaurant my wife and I definitely did not frequent was Elaine’s. We considered the food too depressingly awful.When I was working at Newsweek, I often got out of work at two or three in the morning, and I would walk home up Madison Avenue — often in stilettos — from 49th to 74th and Lex. It was kind of a raffish crossroads. At one end of my block was J.G. Melon — I ate a lot of hamburgers there. Those were days when we ate meat just blissfully. And the city wasn’t so much about money. At Elaine’s, for instance, you would find people Elaine was floating. It wasn’t a rich people’s restaurant; it was a restaurant for people Elaine happened to like. I tried never to leave my ZIP code. In those days, there wasn’t any downtown, so life was much easier.In 1980, I was working as a staff photographer for the New York Post. For one assignment, the paper sent me to Washington Heights to photograph what it said was a riot. Rival crews had been dancing in the subway, and it turned into a fight over who had won. “They were spinning on their heads,” the cops said. I asked the kids to demonstrate what they’d been doing. They called it rocking — early breaking, essentially. But I had no idea what I was photographing. The idea of hip-hop hadn’t really gelled.In the mornings, I’d walk along 125th Street to the store, which I opened in ’82. I’d make sure everything was in place and see what the new orders were. More likely than not, I’d have to go downtown to the garment center to get some fabric or trimming. If it was a Thursday, I’d be rushing to get all my work done, because that was the night I went dancing. There was a popular Puerto Rican dance club, Ochentas, and across the street from that was an Afro-Cuban spot, Club Broadway. I didn’t smoke or drink, and when you don’t do those things, you need an outlet. I’d dance until about two in the morning and then I’d go back to work. I knew so many people in Harlem, I kept a second apartment in the Bronx, where I tried to be unseen. But I had a new Mercedes-Benz, and I’d leave it in front of the store when I was in Harlem so people knew they could reach me.Four days a week, I was studying at the Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute down on 15th Street. Back uptown, Mortimer’s restaurant was a huge place for me. It was social, the Upper East Side ladies. Le Relais, on Madison and 63rd, was more everyone my age and everyone from Europe. I lived at the Olympic Tower, and Halston was downstairs. Sometimes we’d have lunch. If you wanted fancy, you’d go to La Grenouille. If you just wanted to grab a sandwich, you’d go to Burger Heaven. If I were going out that night, I’d go see Garren to fix my hair. And then off we’d go! I’d go with Andy Warhol, or to dinner and then to Studio 54 afterwards. The city was different then. You could order a pizza anytime. Now nothing’s open after 11. When I first moved to Manhattan I was eager to get back to the Bronx as often as possible, so I would go to the Pathmark on 207th Street and pack bags to try to make change. I would get some bus money, some pizza money, some soda money and some money to be able to get into a jam. At the end of the night I would walk all the way home. When I really started hanging out in Manhattan, the primary place for my crew was Rock Steady Park [Happy Warrior Playground] on 98th and Amsterdam. Afterward, we’d go to a club. Broadway 96 [Club Broadway] was more geared to black and Latino youth and that was definitely a wilder place. You would have Rock Steady Crew and Zulu Nation on one side of the room, and this notorious gang called the Ball Busters on the other. The Roxy was on Fridays, when the party was Wheels of Steel, which initially started at Negril in the East Village. I was 16 when we started going to the Roxy, and my guest list was 100 people, and we were kind of like the ornaments on the tree. During this period, Manhattan was where the action was, but there were exceptions to the rule:The Bronx: The Writers’ Bench, a meeting point where graffiti writers would watch passing trains adorned with their work; Disco Fever, the hip-hop club where Run-DMC played their first show; Fashion Moda, a community-minded art space that showed work by emerging artists including Jean-Michel Basquiat, Lady Pink and Jane Dickson.Queens: PS1, the site of the era-defining exhibit “New York/New Wave” (1981); Queensbridge Houses, public housing that counted Juice Crew founder Marley Marl and rapper members Roxanne Shanté and M.C. Shan among its residents.Brooklyn: Empire Roller Skating Center, a rink — with a sound system built by Richard Long — that was a favorite of Cher’s; Albee Square, a public mall where Big Daddy Kane and Biz Markie used to hang out.Read more:The Landmarks That Made New York a Cultural CapitalUptown or Downtown? In the Early ’80s, It Made All the DifferenceOral History: Remembering New York’s Fiorucci StoreKate Guadagnino is the associate editor of T Magazine.  Advertisement