https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/22/dining/hungry-city-kikis-greek-tavern-in-chinatown.html
Kiki’s Greek Tavern Needs No Translation - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
592
AdvertisementSupported byHungry CityKiki’s, which opened on Division Street in April, serves classic Greek food. Here, the loukaniko, pork sausage leavened by orange zest; bifteki, plump fistfuls of ground beef with a rabble of herbs; and lamb chops that put up just enough of a fight with the teeth.By Ligaya MishanDivision Street is short-lived: It starts off under the watchful eyes of the Confucius statue at Bowery’s southern end, ducks under the Manhattan Bridge, and dies out at Canal Street, less than a third of a mile later.It’s Chinatown. But when you arrive on its easternmost block, there are suddenly olive-green French doors flung open on the sidewalk and small lemon and orange trees reaching up from Grecian-style urns. The words on the awning — written in Chinese characters, with no English translation — say Kiki’s Greek Tavern. (That’s how it is pronounced in Cantonese; in Mandarin, it may sound more like “Gigi’s.”)The sign is a nod to the neighborhood’s heritage and the space’s previous inhabitant, a Chinese joss-paper shop; it’s not intended as speakeasy-esque camouflage to deflect the uninitiated. On the contrary, Kiki’s, which opened in April, is a remarkably welcoming restaurant, where fresh carafes of water are plonked on the table even after the bill has been settled and you’re allowed — invited — to idle.Bread arrives first, looking roughed up and wonderful, with slashes of char and giant air pockets where olive oil has pooled. It lends smoke to whatever it touches, whether clean, bright tzatziki or a rippled mash of eggplant overrun by crushed walnuts, or yellow split peas collapsed and approaching the texture of polenta, the earthiness cut by sweet tomato sauce and giant capers.The menu is littered with words like “classic,” “staple,” “uncomplicated,” “straightforward” and “childhood.” This is all to the good. “Uncomplicated” fits a plate of octopus, slow braised, given a nice blackening on the grill and served not as one brandished tentacle but chopped into meaty coins, the better to soak up the surrounding bath of lemon and olive oil.“Straightforward helping of MEAT” is the undersell for a great disarray of loukaniko, pork sausage leavened by orange zest; bifteki, plump fistfuls of ground beef with a rabble of herbs; and lamb chops that put up just enough of a fight with the teeth. They’re supported by an army of fries, long, firm and spiky with oregano, so good it’s hard to understand why fries would ever appear without them.Although only one name is on the awning, the owners number three: Kiki Karamintzas, whose father’s roots lie in Katerini, in northern Greece; Nick Spanos, who grew up partly in Athens; and Pavlos Sierros, who once ran a souvlaki truck and now oversees the Mediterranean-leaning restaurant Forgtmenot down the street with his wife, Abby. (Ms. Karamintzas and Mr. Spanos both worked at Forgtmenot, and the restaurant plays backdrop on the cover of the debut EP by Ms. Karamintzas’s band, the Cabana Kids.) They designed the menu together, then recruited Rita Podaras as a cook to lend what Mr. Spanos calls a “motherly hand” in the kitchen.The food is rich but somehow feels good for you. Here is moussaka with its strata of potatoes, ground beef, pork and eggplant, tamped down by a near inch of crusty béchamel. Shrimp — doused with ouzo, Greece’s anise-laced liquor, then anointed with more anise and heavy cream — are available on their own or, better yet, with spaghetti. Imam bayildi is a cradle of hollowed-out eggplant, brimming with tomato and onions simmered until they’ve lost track of each other’s borders.A “cold,” or unbaked, cheesecake is almost one-third crust, with a thick underlay of smashed Greek digestive biscuits on which, it seems, a cloud of cream cheese and sweetened condensed milk has settled. Yogurt, made with sheep’s and cow’s milk, attains the volume of meringue, vivid under a spill of dark sour cherries.Some of the most memorable flavors are the lightest, like stitches of fresh dill in a minimalist salad, or mastiha, resin from an evergreen tree that grows on the island of Chios, infused in sparkling water, its taste not quite licorice or pine. Or the evanescence of a flowery assyrtiko, a beautiful wine to drink on a sweltering night when the dim room fills with a roar like surf and everyone seems to be talking with insistence and urgency, plotting to mend the world’s seams.This information was last updated on Nov. 27, 2018Advertisement