https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/09/business/carlos-ghosn-nissan-video.html
Carlos Ghosn Accuses Nissan Officials of Mismanagement - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
543
AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben DooleyTOKYO — Carlos Ghosn, the former head of Nissan Motor, slammed the company’s management on Tuesday, arguing that the same executives he says engineered his downfall from the top of a vast auto empire are running the Japanese automaker into the ground.In a video statement played at a hastily assembled news conference, Mr. Ghosn, who currently sits in a Tokyo jail, reiterated that he was innocent of charges of financial impropriety brought against him by Japanese prosecutors. The accusations, he said, are part of a plot carried out by Nissan executives who were afraid he was planning to turn the company into a subsidiary of its alliance partner Renault.But then he shifted gears. The real victim of the intrigue, he said, is not Carlos Ghosn but Nissan. He said the accusations against him stemmed from a plot by Nissan executives trying to draw attention away from years of bad results at the company.[Behind the scenes, Nissan seethed with internal tensions and worries about being absorbed by Renault.]“I’m talking here about a few executives who obviously for their own interests and for their own selfish fears are creating a lot of value destruction,” he said.“It’s sickening,” he added. “I’m worried because, obviously, the performance of Nissan is declining.” Mr. Ghosn did not name any specific Nissan executives.Nissan said Tuesday that Mr. Ghosn and his top lieutenant at the company, Greg Kelly, had been ousted over ethical issues.“Aside from any criminal matters, Nissan’s internal investigation has uncovered substantial evidence of blatantly unethical conduct,” it said in a statement.The Japanese authorities first arrested Mr. Ghosn in November on suspicion that he and Mr. Kelly conspired to underreport his compensation. He has since been charged by prosecutors over the compensation issue, as well as accusations that he temporarily shifted personal financial losses onto Nissan’s books.Last week, Mr. Ghosn was arrested for a fourth time, this time on suspicion that he used one of the company’s subsidiaries to enrich himself at a cost of $5 million to the company. The authorities took him from the Tokyo apartment where he had been living since being released on bail in early March after more than 100 days in detention.Earlier last week, Mr. Ghosn took to Twitter to announce plans for a news conference where he would “tell the truth” about the accusations against him. He recorded his video declaration before his most recent arrest as an insurance policy in case he was unable to make a personal appearance, Mr. Ghosn’s lawyer Junichiro Hironaka told reporters during the news conference on Tuesday.As the recording began, Mr. Ghosn, wearing a white shirt and a navy blazer, warned that he could be arrested again. “If you are listening to me through this video today,” he said, “it means I was not able to make the news conference.”In the video, Mr. Ghosn said he had been a fierce defender of the autonomy of Nissan, which is 43 percent owned by Renault.“But this autonomy must be based on performance,” he said. “Nobody gets autonomy for the sake of autonomy.”Nissan’s performance has degraded, he said, citing disappointing profits, unspecified quality issues and a drop in the share price. Nissan recalled 1.2 million vehicles from the Japanese market two years ago after regulators faulted it for allowing workers who lacked required credentials to certify the cars.“At the end of the day, during all of this period, I suffered not only because of my case,” he said. “But who was taking care of Nissan? Who was taking care of the brand? Who was defending corporate value?”The accusations against him are “biased, taken out of context, twisted in a way to paint a personage of greed and a personage of dictatorship,” Mr. Ghosn said, without going into specifics. He also did not address the most recent accusations, which were brought after the video was filmed.The comments about Nissan’s performance followed a special meeting of the company’s shareholders on Monday to remove Mr. Ghosn from the board. At that meeting, the company’s current chief executive, Hiroto Saikawa, argued that the problems the company had faced in recent years stemmed from Mr. Ghosn’s concentration of power.Advertisement