http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/dining/wine-school-assignment-marsannay-burgundy.html
Your Next Lesson: Marsannay Burgundy - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
680
AdvertisementSupported byWine SchoolBy Eric AsimovNext up, we visit what many consider the spiritual center for much that we worship about red wine: Burgundy.Is this an exaggeration? Maybe. Yet much that has been romanticized about wine can be traced directly to Burgundy. I am not at all above the romance of wine. On the contrary, I would argue that Burgundy is where wine can most clearly be understood in all its wondrous facets: as an expression of culture, as an intellectual exposition and as a profoundly soul-stirring pleasure.As tempting as it may be to gaze adoringly at Burgundy and bathe it in moonbeams, it’s important to remember that the source of its greatness is its closeness to the soil, its earthiness. We may rhapsodize in books and tasting rooms about the wonders of terroir, but this knowledge comes from the sweaty, muscular labor of cultivating vines in dirt.So let’s be clear: Wherever the perceptions of Burgundy may lead you, however valued and venerated it is around the world, it’s just wine — wine that’s meant to be opened and enjoyed, not put on a pedestal and swaggered about.This month, we’ll be drinking Marsannay, one of the less-exalted villages of the Côte de Nuits, which, along with the Côte de Beaune, makes up the Côte d’Or, the heartland of fine Burgundy. Why Marsannay? Principally because, though good Burgundy is never cheap, Marsannay is more moderately priced than the more prized villages. Here are the three bottles:Domaine Trapet Père et Fils Marsannay 2013 (Polaner Selectinos, Mount Kisco, N.Y.) $40Domaine Bart Marsannay Les Echezots 2013 (Jeanne-Marie de Champs/Fruit of the Vines, New York) $30Domaine Sylvain Pataille Marsannay Clos du Roy 2013 (Selection Pas Mal/Becky Wasserman/U.S.A. Imports, New York) $50As is true with so much of Burgundy, quantities are scarce. These wines will be hard to find, so don’t hesitate to try either other cuvées from these producers, other vintages, or other Marsannay producers. I recommend looking as well for Bruno Clair, Régis Bouvier, Philippe Roty, Charles Audoin, Chanson Père et Fils, Méo-Camuzet, Louis Jadot and Joseph Faiveley.Red Burgundy is one of the most versatile of all wines and will go with many foods, from sturdy fish to red meat. Few combinations are better than Burgundy and a good roast chicken.Ordinarily, I would not sweat the glassware. But red Burgundy is so beautifully aromatic, it’s best to enhance these qualities with good, deep glasses. You don’t need to decant these wines, as it’s great fun to observe how they change and open up with time and air, but it wouldn’t be a bad idea, either. As always with good reds, serve these cool: ideally, if you are numerically inclined, just above 60 degrees.Advertisement