https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/31/books/review/eliza-griswold-amity-and-prosperity.html
What Happened When Fracking Came to Town - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2196
AdvertisementSupported byNonfictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By JoAnn WypijewskiAMITY AND PROSPERITY One Family and the Fracturing of America By Eliza Griswold 318 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $27.At Page 51 of “Amity and Prosperity,” Eliza Griswold’s saga of fracking’s impact on the town of Amity in southwest Pennsylvania, I made a note in the margin: “Why People Hate Government.” By then her protagonist’s son, Harley Haney, had suffered mouth ulcers, severe abdominal pain, nausea, swollen lymph nodes and dizziness. Wilting in a recliner, he had missed a year and a half of middle school. His dog had died. The neighbors’ dogs had died. The tap water was running black and smelled foul. The air reeked. A quarter-mile up the hill, workers in Hazmat suits had applied 819 pounds of a carcinogen to contain a bacterial outbreak at a waste pond for the gas wells near his home.Harley’s mother, Stacey Haney, suffered headaches, rashes and fatigue. His younger sister, Paige, had stomachaches and nosebleeds. The neighbors were sick, too, and one, Beth Voyles, kept a dead puppy in her freezer as potential evidence. She had been complaining to the state Department of Environmental Protection for months. An agent there said that the hydrogen sulfide in the local air was naturally occurring. A representative of the company that owned the gas wells, Range Resources, told Stacey to boil her water before drinking it. Harley’s condition was finally diagnosed: arsenic poisoning. Staying home sick from school had only made him worse. Toxins accrue.It’s at this point that Griswold writes: “Gov. Ed Rendell, a Democrat, sliced the D.E.P.’s budget of $217,515,000 by 27 percent, one of the biggest cuts in its history. The governor also shaved 19 percent from the $113,369,000 budget of the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources” and “started leasing oil and gas rights on public land. In three separate sales, the state made $413 million by leasing 138,866 acres. This marked the beginning of one of the largest public sell-offs in Pennsylvania’s recent history.”Like the governor, like their neighbors sitting atop Appalachia’s gas-rich Marcellus Shale, like the federal government and many thousands of other people across rural America, Stacey and Beth had leased gas rights on their land. Something so ordinary must be safe, the two women figured. And the money the drillers offered was tantalizing. That’s part of the tragedy. However grand their dreams (farmers’ hopes that gas royalties would make them millionaires), or modest (Stacey’s wish for $8,000 to build a barn), or abstract (consumers’ faith in clean, cheap natural gas), almost everyone wanted to believe in the fantastic deal. Griswold aims to count the costs.Hydraulic fracturing, as she demonstrates, entails as much violence as the name implies. Putting aside the burden on roads, tranquillity and social relations, to frack a gas well means taking roughly four million gallons of water, poisoning it with chemicals, some of them proprietary secrets, and forcing this brew, together with some three million pounds of clay pellets or silica sand, into a well that extends horizontally a mile or two through shale. The shale cracks. The results: gas, fractured bedrock, depleted freshwater supplies and toxic waste. Now fortified with bacteria, heavy metals and additional toxins, the fracking fluid that returns to the surface presents a problem with no good solution. Some of it stays underground, where it combines with methane and can migrate into aquifers, streams and private wells. Imagine this process multiplied. Stacey’s eight acres lay amid five wells; her county, Washington, has 1,146. The state of Pennsylvania has 7,788. The United States has more than 300,000.Politicians still call it clean. In the early 2000s, Congress exempted fracking from provisions of the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act and the Safe Drinking Water Act. Amid the wreckage of the financial crisis, President Obama touted it as a win for the economy and the environment. As secretary of state, Hillary Clinton pushed it on the world. After leaving office, in 2011, Governor Rendell became a paid consultant to a private-equity firm with investments in fracking. His former deputy chief of staff, another deputy, his D.E.P. chief and other erstwhile regulators enlisted in the corporate ranks of oil and gas.The fracking boom muted more imaginative approaches to the common welfare, and suppressed honest appraisals of costs. In 2012, Obama’s E.P.A. announced that the brown, putrid water issuing from people’s taps in Dimock, Pa., posed no danger. In 2016, a Centers for Disease Control agency, using the same samples, declared Dimock’s water a health hazard. Every E.P.A. agent who knocked on Stacey Haney’s door promising aid disappeared into the mist; one eventually became environmental director of Chesapeake Energy. Lately, as landowners’ royalties have shrunk and the financial press warns that the boom looks like a bubble, systemic dials seem locked on “drill.” The current governor of Pennsylvania, Tom Wolf, a Democrat, recently requested more D.E.P. inspectors, not to address thousands of frack-related citizen complaints but to speed up permits for new drilling. D.E.P., some people say, stands for “Department of Energy Production” or “Don’t Expect Protection.”Griswold reports so much government neglect, deception and collusion — here augmented with data from the Public Accountability Initiative, NPR’s StateImpact project and the nonprofit investigative site Public Herald — that as I read I abbreviated my marginal notes to “WPHG.” By the time her story reaches 2016, it’s plain that people who have lost their water, their home’s value, their farm animals and pets, their health and hope for relief would not be making conventional electoral choices. Beth Voyles voted for Donald Trump; Stacey Haney, for Jill Stein.The broad political costs of fracking are not expressly Griswold’s subject, however. Her impressive research notwithstanding, “Amity and Prosperity” is at heart a David and Goliath story fit for the movies. It has everything but a happy ending: a bucolic setting concealing fortune and danger; poor but proud locals who’ve endured sequential boom-bust cycles of resource extraction (Prosperity is a neighboring town ravaged by long-wall mining); tough, reluctant victim-heroes; grisly scenes of animal die-off; and courtroom drama, as a tenacious husband-wife legal team takes on the industry and the state, wins one important case but can’t outlast its adversaries’ moneyed obstructionism. Stacey and Beth settle out of court and submit to a gag order. Harley gets healthier once the family abandons its home, but, with no illusions left, he finishes high school on the internet and takes a job laying gas pipeline. Advantage, Goliath.Mood carries the story. We know Harley by his long alienation. We know the lawyer Kendra Smith by her mastery of an alphabet of toxins, her slog through documents and her ire as Range Resources refuses to disclose all its proprietary chemicals. We know Stacey by her dedication — to her kids and three jobs, to whatever tradition she can salvage and fight she can muster. Mostly we know her by her fury and her fears. The book’s prologue reproduces a raging note she posted on her forsaken farmhouse after thieves stripped it of metal. Through most of the action she strives to be polite: Don’t make anyone mad, she reasons, it’ll only get worse for you.It gets worse anyway. Range Resources inexorably appropriates Amity’s allegiances and civic life. The county fair devolves into occupied territory, an echo of Griswold’s previous experience reporting in Asia and Africa. From so vital a perspective, one longs for at least a snapshot of national scale — the West pocked with frackpads, the almost daily earthquakes in Oklahoma from waste injection, the tens of thousands of people who’ve had no say in drilling near their homes, the workers risking damage, the question everywhere: Who will defend the water?Griswold ascribes ideas to Stacey about “the American dream” and the need to “tough it out,” about the “price one paid for progress” and failing “through no fault of her own.” Maybe Stacey used those phrases (she is not directly quoted doing so), but she should have been spared banality. She fell for a con. Her own night terrors best convey her sense of responsibility and fracture: images of driving in reverse, of her children trapped or falling, of her inability to control anything — dreams from which she awoke “caught between gasping for breath and fearing the air.”Until land is laid waste nearby, people don’t think much about sacrificed populations or the historic function of government rooted in colonization and corporatism. Thieving, or regulating theft, is a simple term for it. People who’ve lost their water to fracking, like those who live in impoverished, toxified communities everywhere, like the people of Flint, are on a continuum that began with the indigenous peoples, the enslaved Africans and the “waste people” (“refuse,” as Benjamin Franklin called poor Pennsylvanians), who were forced off the land, into bondage or penury at America’s dawn. The nature of oppression changes, but the levers of power that have helped some to prosper while allowing many to sink are hardened in place, and the persistent question, implicit in this valuable, discomforting book, is Who will unstick them?JoAnn Wypijewski is working on a book about encounters with America in a time of crackup.OpinionThe Editorial BoardOpinionEliza GriswoldAdvertisement