https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/14/theater/constellations-with-jake-gyllenhaal-and-ruth-wilson-opens-on-broadway.html
‘Constellations,’ With Jake Gyllenhaal and Ruth Wilson, Opens on Broadway - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1756
AdvertisementSupported byTheater ReviewBy Ben BrantleyWho knew that higher physics could be so sexy, so accessible — and so emotionally devastating?“Constellations,” Nick Payne’s gorgeous two-character drama, starring a perfectly matched Jake Gyllenhaal and Ruth Wilson, may be the most sophisticated date play Broadway has seen. This 70-minute fugue-like production, which opened on Tuesday night at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater, takes that most elemental of dramatic setups — boy meets girl — and then spins it into a seeming infinitude of might-have-been alternatives.This is achieved through the application of the principles of string theory, relativity and quantum mechanics, although don’t ask me to explain precisely how. In college, I barely squeaked through Physics for Poets. But I had no difficulty following the convolutions of the relationship between Roland (Mr. Gyllenhaal), a beekeeper, and Marianne (Ms. Wilson), a Cambridge University academic specializing in “theoretical early universe cosmology.”Did I just hear you gulp? Or perhaps sigh at the prospect of another sentimental portrait of a British brainiac, what with those Oscar-bait movies starring Eddie Redmayne and Benedict Cumberbatch as geniuses under siege?You are probably more apt to discover your own self in the characters of “Constellations,” which was first staged in London in 2012 and arrives here in a Manhattan Theater Club production. I would even venture that it’s impossible not to identify with Roland and Marianne if you’ve ever been in love. No, make that if you’ve ever relived your life in your mind, considering the factors that made things happen as they did.Though I loved “Constellations” when I saw it in London three years ago, there were no guarantees that it would cross the Atlantic unscarred. It was originally staged in the tiny upstairs space of the Royal Court Theater, and acted by Sally Hawkins and Rafe Spall with such intimate delicacy that you felt like an unseen eavesdropper in a bedroom.Moving to Broadway inevitably means growing bigger and, if calculating producers have their way, landing proportionately bigger stars. The requisite glamour quotient has been filled by Ms. Wilson, a veteran of the London stage best known to American audiences for the sensual Showtime series “The Affair” (for which she just won a Golden Globe), and Mr. Gyllenhaal, a movie marquee name of long standing.But as staged by its original director, Michael Longhurst, “Constellations” has been scaled up without bloat, and it’s every bit as affecting as I remember. Tom Scutt’s set is, as it was, a tabula rasa — a black box punctuated by suspended clusters of white balloons, lighted with finesse by Lee Curran — on which small, individual destinies may be written, and rewritten, ad infinitum.The authors of these destinies may have unusual occupations. But it is essential that they register as schmoes like us. Mr. Gyllenhaal and Ms. Wilson, I am happy to report, have seldom appeared less obviously compelling on the surface. Their starlight has been banked and internalized. This means that while we see them as they see each other, we are also allowed to see them as they see themselves — which is as gauche lummoxes.They are crippled by self-consciousness when they meet and remain so, to fluctuating degrees, even as they grow closer. “Constellations” is about, among other things, how inevitably fraught and imperfect communication is, even with people closest to you. Conversations here, both casual and life-changing (and these aren’t mutually exclusive), are always a matter of shouting and signaling across an unbreachable gulf. Because they are the creations of a wise and compassionate young playwright, Roland and Marianne have been allowed to revise and reinflect such conversations. By conventional standards, there are only four or five proper scenes in “Constellations.”But each of those vignettes — starting with Roland and Marianne’s first encounter, at a barbecue given by mutual friends — is presented multiple times. It’s boy meets girl, girl meets boy, boy (or girl) gets and loses and gets girl (or boy) over and over again.At one point, Marianne explains to Roland that in “the quantum multiverse,” one of her areas of study, “every decision you’ve ever and never made exists in an unimaginably vast ensemble of parallel universes.” That’s the template for “Constellations,” and you don’t have to be Stephen Hawking to have applied this idea to your own experience.Who among us hasn’t tried to reconstruct a moment from our lives that had further-reaching consequences than we ever expected? (This same idea is given more bald and schematic life by the current musical “If/Then.”) “Constellations” assesses the variables of such moments, factoring in the unreliability of memory, and suggests how even a change in tone of voice can alter the course of events. This makes the play both a treat and a potential trap for its performers. They have a glorious opportunity to keep trying out the same lines with different readings, which is standard practice on a movie set, but seldom in live theater.But they must also bring the same weight and conviction to every interpretation, or else the play can feel like a virtuoso acting exercise. It’s no surprise that Ms. Wilson, a two-time Olivier Award winner, is comfortable with her role’s demands. But Mr. Gyllenhaal, whose theater experience is more limited, is every bit as persuasive.They are both fluent in the awkward body language of nerds in love, and in the crossed signals of emotional ambivalence. But they use contrasting and complementary physical vocabularies to balance, gracefully and clumsily, shifts in power and longing, aggression and retreat.Mr. Gyllenhaal’s Roland, a magnificent work of understatement, is the more naturally inhibited. His default stance is a hunch, with his hands buried in his pockets, and there’s a valiance in his eternal attempts to break through that posture.Ms. Wilson is more expansive of gesture; you suspect that her Marianne sees her intellectuality as a social handicap, and she overcompensates by being louder and funnier than she needs to be. This makes her all the more moving whenever words start to fail her.And though “Constellations” is a supremely articulate play, it knows that words inevitably fail, that they are never enough to bind two people together forever. Time, it turns out, is a more effective breaker of hearts than human beings, with all their conflicted intentions, can ever be. This story of parallel universes is universal in every sense of the word.Schedule information on Wednesday with a theater review of “Constellations,” at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater in Manhattan, misstated the closing date. It is March 15, not Feb. 15.This information was last updated on Aug. 27, 2018Advertisement