https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/11/opinion/campaign-stops/the-donald-trump-we-always-knew.html
Opinion | The Donald Trump We Always Knew - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2702
AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew RosenthalWatching Republican leaders and talking heads spin themselves dizzy over the second presidential debate would be entertaining if the situation was not so tragic.Here’s what we are supposed to believe happened: Donald Trump won the debate because he’s not dropping out or getting forced out by his own party, because his running mate, Mike Pence, did not quit the race and because the speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, did not withdraw his endorsement.Yes, a growing number of Republican officials are now denouncing Trump. And Ryan told his fellow Republican lawmakers in a conference call on Monday that he wasn’t going to campaign for Trump – as if Trump cares. But all of that is too little, too late.The Republicans who say they changed their minds about Trump because of the 2005 video in which he brags about sexually assaulting women are particularly galling. The video was disgusting, but it showed us nothing new about Trump. He’s been insulting women all year, along with Mexican immigrants, Muslims, gay Americans and people with disabilities.On Sunday, Trump showed once again that this race is and has always been about his ego, and about sexism, racism, isolationism, fear and anger. It is about hating President Obama, mostly because he is African-American. It is about the hard right trying to seize control of Washington so it can roll back half a century of economic, racial and social progress.I’ve never believed that the Republican leadership really disagreed with Trump’s fringe views. They just didn’t like the way he expressed them, because it exposed some powerful and disturbing currents in their party. Even Ryan’s rather tepid denunciation of Trump provoked howls of outrage from some of the more extreme Republicans in Congress.So it was not in the least surprising that Pence was back to praising Trump after the debate, or that right-wing commentators were trying to help the nominee repair whatever damage that 2005 video may have caused.Guy Benson, political editor of the conservative website Townhall, said: “He improved, exceeded expectations, decisively won several exchanges.”When expectations are somewhere below rock bottom, it’s not hard to exceed them. And to think Trump “won” his exchanges with Clinton, you’d have to give him points for getting the audience to hoot derisively when he said he wanted to put her in jail.Pence said Trump “was able to move beyond that controversy” over the 2005 tape. “He expressed genuine contrition for the words he used on the video that became public,” Pence said on Fox News on Monday.Maybe Pence should be excused for living in an alternate reality. After all, he agreed to run with Trump. But Trump did not show contrition, genuine or not. He tossed off his comments about groping women as locker-room banter (a sadly familiar excuse for men’s bad behavior). And he doubled down on attacking Hillary Clinton over Bill Clinton’s sordid behavior, holding a photo op right before the debate with three of Bill’s accusers, and then trying to get them seated in his family box at the debate.(By the way, if Hillary Clinton is supposed to be ashamed for standing by her man and believing the best of him, what are we supposed to think about Melania Trump, who did the same thing? And if we are supposed to excuse Trump’s comments 11 years ago, why are we still talking about Bill Clinton’s decades ago?)Trump showed last night that he knows next to nothing about foreign policy, claiming that Russia was beating the United States because Obama had done nothing to modernize the American nuclear forces. In the real world, Obama has supported a plan to spend about $1 trillion over the next three decades on modernizing nuclear weapons.He never backed off his proposal to ban all Muslim immigration. He just called it “extreme vetting,” sort of like President George W. Bush called torture “enhanced interrogation.” Then he went on to lecture Muslim-Americans about informing on their neighbors.And Trump said that if he is elected, he will appoint a special prosecutor to indict Clinton over her emails. In fact, Trump said, if he were president, she “would be in jail” now. Apparently Trump would have overruled the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s finding that no crime was committed and tossed Clinton behind bars (a power the president, thankfully, does not have).Trump was mean and angry, hovering behind Clinton when she talked to make her look small, interrupting her constantly and berating the debate moderator Martha Raddatz when she tried to get him to stop filibustering and answer a question.Clinton said too often that viewers could find all the facts on her website, but she showed admirable restraint in dealing with someone who will tell you the sun is shining when it’s midnight.I don’t think last night’s debate changed many minds. Melania Trump said the man in the 2005 video is not the man she knows. But he is the man the rest of us know. To vote for him, you have to pretend you don’t know who he really is — or choose not to care.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. Advertisement