https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/books/review/amitava-kumar-immigrant-montana.html
An Immigrant Weaves His Love Stories Between Fact and Fiction - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2158
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Jabari AsimIMMIGRANT, MONTANA By Amitava Kumar 304 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.95.In his consistently entertaining new book, “Immigrant, Montana,” Amitava Kumar, an Indian-born writer and scholar, recalls the youthful romantic adventures of Kailash, an Indian-born writer and scholar. The fuzzy distinctions between the author’s life and that of his fictional protagonist are multiple and intentional. “This is a work of fiction as well as nonfiction,” Kumar explains in an author’s note, “an in-between novel by an in-between writer.”The relationship between fact and fiction provides an animating tension throughout Kailash’s recollection of his salad days. While pursuing graduate study at a university that sounds a lot like Columbia, he researched the life and career of Agnes Smedley, a real-life American writer, best known for her book “Daughter of Earth.” Kailash describes it as “neither a memoir nor simply a novel. And when I read it, I thought Smedley offered us a model for writing.” He found a similar example in a charismatic professor named Ehsaan Ali. “From Ehsaan we wanted narrative,” Kailash recalls. “We didn’t always care how much of it was nonfiction or fiction. Ehsaan lived — and narrated — his life along the blurry Line of Control between the two genres.”Kailash navigates those same categories from the vantage point of middle age, looking back on events that happened more than two decades before. He organizes his remembrances according to the women with whom he was involved at the time. These include Jennifer, an older grad school dropout; Nina, the enigmatic center of Kailash’s memories and perhaps of the novel; and Cai Yan, a “slim and elegant” grad student from China. He stumbled through these affairs of the heart while also weathering the complications of immigration and the ineluctable tug of home. “It was easier to keep the worlds apart,” he says, “even if doing so meant seeing myself as split or divided. I was already learning that I was moving away from my parents; their world now seemed so different from mine.” Kumar faces up to the consequences of this fissure, punctuating his protagonist’s story with memories of his childhood and trips home as an adult. At one point he confesses: “I felt stranded in language. I had become a translated man, no longer able to connect with my own past.”He interrupts his testimony, as it were, with appeals to an imaginary white judge, referred to as Your Honor. In one such exchange, he explains to the unseen jurist: “This is the juncture where I wish to note, once and for all, that the plot of history advances through the acts of lovers. Oh, the wisdom of love. The superiority of love and its many follies.” While the best of his asides to the bench can be quite witty, they sometimes come off as unnecessary digressions in an otherwise easefully flowing narrative.In his memories, Kailash’s eager exploration of love’s splendors and pitfalls took place amid considerable political and intellectual commotion. His grad student cohort talked about mobilizing against war in the Persian Gulf. Wine-fueled parties and bull sessions abounded with talk of Gramsci, Chomsky and Stuart Hall. When he finally completed his master’s thesis, Kailash realized what he really wanted to write about was love. Readers will be neither surprised nor displeased by this epiphany, since Kailash has managed to do so all along, with considerable wit to boot.“I have always wanted to be in love,” he says, looking back. “All I have managed to do is tell a story.” We should all accomplish so much.Jabari Asim directs the M.F.A. program in creative writing at Emerson College. His latest book, “We Can’t Breathe: On Black Lives, White Lies and the Art of Survival,” will be published in October.Advertisement