https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/04/dining/eric-ripert-chef-book.html
Eric Ripert Looks Back on a Youth Both Tender and Tough - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2050
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeff GordinierAfter sliding into a banquette at Brasserie Cognac, a French restaurant on Broadway, Eric Ripert didn’t even give the lunchtime menu a glance.“I want cheese soufflé, steak au poivre and tarte Tatin,” he told Jolie White, the general manager. He asked for the steak cooked rare. He decided the meal deserved a glass of red wine.“Voilà,” Ms. White said with a brisk nod of affirmation. “Classic.”Mr. Ripert, 51, works a few blocks away as the chef at Le Bernardin, the holy seafood sanctuary that has been viewed for decades as a gold standard of culinary exquisiteness. (Since its debut in 1986, the restaurant has received four stars from The New York Times all five times it has been reviewed. Mr. Ripert landed there in 1991.) When he wants to come home to classic bistro fare, though, he often heads to this far more everyday place.“To me, there’s something magical about soufflé,” he said. “To this day, when I see a soufflé rising, I’m mesmerized. I’m just like a kid again.”On the surface, it may look like an exercise in gauzy Gallic nostalgia, but anyone who dips into Mr. Ripert’s forthcoming memoir, “32 Yolks,” will realize that “just like a kid again” is a very complicated phrase for Mr. Ripert.His formative years in France and Andorra were marked by a fair share of misery. His parents split; his dashing and beloved father died of a heart attack when Eric was 11; and his stepfather, whom he refers to by the pseudonym Hugo, seemed to delight in dishing out an endless array of torment.“He was a parasite,” Mr. Ripert said. “It was a disaster for the family. He basically destroyed our life.” (With Mr. Ripert’s encouragement, his mother eventually kicked Hugo out of the house.)For a while, Mr. Ripert, lonely and angry, was shipped to a boarding school, where he says he fended off the advances of a predatory former priest, and his early forays into the hospitality business included mishaps both comic (a Marx Brothers-style spilling incident in culinary school) and agonizing (a Martin Scorsese-style body-scalding in the kitchen at La Tour d’Argent in Paris).Mr. Ripert has been a prominent figure in New York City since 1991, but fans of his cooking, and even his closest friends, have remained unaware of his youthful pain.“I had no idea,” said Anthony Bourdain, who has spent countless hours talking and traveling with Mr. Ripert. The chef has always struck him as a happy and balanced person, prone to neither the neurosis nor the self-sabotage that would hint at the presence of hidden scars.“I knew it wasn’t a happy childhood, but I had no idea how dark,” Mr. Bourdain said. “You just don’t see evidence of that darkness.” He compared “32 Yolks” to a Dickens novel. “I was absolutely, as the Brits say, gobsmacked,” he said. “I read it in one sitting.”In the book, composed in collaboration with the author Veronica Chambers, who met with Mr. Ripert for scores of conversations in a private room at Le Bernardin, food serves as a frequent source of comfort and an occasional arena of agony.There are the elaborate, nourishing meals prepared at home by his mother, Monique. “My mother worked six days a week at her boutique, but she cooked like a Michelin-starred chef every single night,” Mr. Ripert writes.And there are lessons in the soul of cooking from men like Jacques Quillacq, a stocky and temperamental chef in Andorra who befriended the young Eric after the death of his father, and Georges Desbouges, a gentleman farmer in Gascony who took Mr. Ripert under his wing (and taught him about meat and smoke and country fare) just before Mr. Ripert moved to the United States and began to make a name for himself.But there are also brutal tours of duty in the kitchens of La Tour d’Argent and Jamin, the three-Michelin-star atelier where the chef Joël Robuchon ruled, according to “32 Yolks,” like the nit-picking, trip-wired Darth Vader of degustation.“Everyone dealt with the pressure differently,” Mr. Ripert writes of his comrades at Jamin. “Some guys shook all the time. Some went downstairs and cried in the stairwell. I saw a few guys punch the walls. Some guys suffered crippling anxiety attacks.”Over lunch, Mr. Ripert said he still endures a recurring nightmare about Mr. Robuchon. “The dream happens every two or three months, still,” Mr. Ripert said. “I fail in America in my career, and I go back to work for him.”(In a response for this article, Mr. Robuchon wrote in an email, “Let me be clear, I am very demanding with my team, almost as much as with myself, but I condemn violence in any form whatsoever.” He said that the book described a high-pressure period when Jamin was trying to win its third Michelin star, and that in the years since, he had become “more flexible.” He described Mr. Ripert as a friend with whom he regularly keeps in touch.)Mr. Ripert’s book is also full of passages of mystical beauty and raw emotion, including a heartbreaking scene in which the young Eric experiences a visitation from his dead father’s spirit and finds a moment to say goodbye. In spite of all the rich material, though, an editor at Random House had to pursue Mr. Ripert relentlessly, for years, to persuade him to do the book.He resisted for the same reason that his close friends knew next to nothing about his childhood: He is not wired to spill or to linger in the past. “I’m very much in the present, and I never go back in time,” he said.All of the experiences chronicled in “32 Yolks,” both bright and dark, feed into Mr. Ripert’s work at Le Bernardin. He strives to run his kitchen “the kind way, the compassionate way,” as a sharp break from the reign-of-terror, chef-is-God approach embedded in centuries of French tradition.“You can achieve the exact same results,” he said. “But going the kind way is a much longer process. If you get kicked in the butt, you learn immediately.”In his culinary aesthetic, the discipline and precision that he absorbed from Mr. Robuchon are paired with a deep love of home cooking and a rustic honesty that Mr. Ripert picked up along the way.“The power of the flavors — that comes from soul food,” he said. Without such roots, he added, “your food stays pretty and superficial.”Much of what he cooks, and eats, is tangled in the memories that he explores in “32 Yolks.” The cheese soufflé at Brasserie Cognac reminded him of his mother’s crab soufflé.“Everything is in this soufflé, for me,” he said. “It warms your body. It warms your soul at the same time.” His mother’s rendition was so delicate that it defied being made in volume.“It was my big frustration not to be able to do the crab soufflé at Le Bernardin,” he said. As a child, he was (in his own words) something of a glutton, and his appetite has never really waned. “I don’t eat for memory,” he said. “I eat because I love what I’m going to eat, and then it brings the memory.”Mr. Ripert’s appetite for comfort food and memories was in evidence over lunch, where he inhaled all but a few scraps of his colossal repast. When it comes to food, he feels no impulse to hold back.“Why would I?” he said. “I cannot eat and think about restriction. When I eat, I eat. I do not understand the idea of guilty pleasure. It’s all about pleasure.”Advertisement