https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/03/us/politics/trump-statement-steve-bannon.html
Read Trump’s Reaction to Steve Bannon’s Comments - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2412
AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesWASHINGTON — The Trump administration on Wednesday released a statement in response to comments that Stephen K. Bannon, the former White House chief strategist, made to Michael Wolff for his book, Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House. In the book, Mr. Bannon said that a meeting between members of the Trump team and a lawyer with Russian connections had been “treasonous.” An excerpt from the book was published by New York Magazine.The following statement was released from the White House, through the pool report. ____From press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders:Statement from the President of the United StatesSteve Bannon has nothing to do with me or my Presidency. When he was fired, he not only lost his job, he lost his mind. Steve was a staffer who worked for me after I had already won the nomination by defeating seventeen candidates, often described as the most talented field ever assembled in the Republican party.Now that he is on his own, Steve is learning that winning isn’t as easy as I make it look. Steve had very little to do with our historic victory, which was delivered by the forgotten men and women of this country. Yet Steve had everything to do with the loss of a Senate seat in Alabama held for more than thirty years by Republicans. Steve doesn’t represent my base—he’s only in it for himself.Steve pretends to be at war with the media, which he calls the opposition party, yet he spent his time at the White House leaking false information to the media to make himself seem far more important than he was. It is the only thing he does well. Steve was rarely in a one-on-one meeting with me and only pretends to have had influence to fool a few people with no access and no clue, whom he helped write phony books.We have many great Republican members of Congress and candidates who are very supportive of the Make America Great Again agenda. Like me, they love the United States of America and are helping to finally take our country back and build it up, rather than simply seeking to burn it all down.Advertisement