https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/20/dining/muscadet-a-great-value-isnt-getting-its-due.html
Muscadet Just Doesn’t Get Its Due - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1963
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovGORGES, France — The gently rolling green hills paint a picture of pastoral simplicity here in Muscadet country, about 15 miles southeast of the city of Nantes, near to where the Loire empties into the Atlantic. The placid surface belies the complex clash of soils underneath, where multiple forms of granite, clay, schist and metamorphic descendants of granite (like gneiss and orthogneiss) turn most discussions with grape growers into detailed geology lessons. The intricacies of these soils provide the raw materials for the melon de Bourgogne grape, which produces Muscadet, a wine that, like the landscape, is far more complex than it may appear at first glance. The world knows Muscadet as a cheap, simple white wine that is made to drink young and that happens to be nature’s perfect accompaniment to the oyster. This much is true: Muscadet is most definitely white, inexpensive and goes beautifully with raw oysters and most other shellfish. But simple? Best when young? These are the stereotypes that sadly have succeeded in making good Muscadet a great but little-known value.Great Muscadet can be a complex treat. Along with subtle flavors of fruit and herbs, Muscadet, like so many of the best white wines, offers an almost tactile expression of the earth in which the grapes were grown. Best of all, great Muscadet can age exceptionally well over decades, evolving in complex and distinctive ways. It’s a rare wine that is beautiful at each stage. Even on the more expensive end, it’s a steal.On a recent trip through Muscadet country, I visited with a half-dozen of the best producers. To a person, their frustration was as palpable as their devotion to the wine.They see a bureaucracy that penalizes efforts to make better wine when they depart from the mediocre norm. They see consumers, particularly in France, who refuse to consider that Muscadet can be anything better than a dull supermarket wine. They see a vast majority of their colleagues settling for lazy farming and winemaking, which confirms public opinion. Mostly, they worry whether a new generation will want to carry forward the historic culture of Muscadet production given the prospect of scant rewards.At the same time, these producers are the success stories of Muscadet, dedicated to making wines of the highest quality despite the cost in labor and capital. “I just want to fight against the bad image of Muscadet,” said Frédéric Niger Van Herck of Domaine de l’Écu.Mr. Van Herck is a newcomer to the region, a rare outsider in the business. He was an Internet entrepreneur, a wine geek who wanted to get into the business. His dedication to biodynamic viticulture led him to Guy Bossard, the longtime proprietor of l’Écu, who was a pioneer in biodynamic viticulture, having made the transition some 20 years ago. Mr. Bossard was looking to retire but had no heirs. They were like-minded enough that Mr. Bossard sold to Mr. Van Herck and has stayed on as a consultant. “We don’t make the best wines in the world, but we make them with conviction,” he said.L’Écu’s three main Muscadet cuvées are meant to show off the qualities of the three major terroirs they farm. Of the wines from 2013, a difficult but excellent vintage, Gneiss is the softest and most easygoing. Orthogneiss is both subtler and more concentrated, while Granite is densely mineral, lively and with great finesse. “We have to stop thinking of Muscadet as something you have to drink three months after you buy it,” Mr. Van Herck said. “These three expressions are for 10 to 15 years in the cellar.”Among the best Muscadet producers, generational transition has been something of an issue. Marc Ollivier of Domaine de la Pépière, who makes wonderfully expressive Muscadets from a range of terroirs, has in the last decade taken on two young partners, Rémi Branger in 2006, and Gwénaëlle Croix in 2013. André-Michel Brégeon, who makes substantial, energetic Muscadets from the gabbro rock here in Gorges, has taken on a protégé, Frédéric Lailler, as he nears retirement. Pierre Luneau and Monique Papin of Luneau-Papin, luckily, have a son and daughter-in-law, Pierre-Marie and Marie Luneau, who have taken the reins of their excellent estate. Jo Landron, who has made wonderful wines at Domaine de la Louvetrie after taking over for his father in the 1980s, is not yet near retirement, but he has a son who has become a grape grower. In Mr. Landron’s case, an earlier generational transition was not easy. After he took over, he stopped using chemical herbicides and began plowing the soil. He started farming organically and, eventually, biodynamically. His father, Pierre, did not approve. “But he was retired,” Mr. Landron said.Nowadays, almost all the best producers work organically, biodynamically or in approximate ways. But they farm a small fraction of the land.“Attentive farming is not new for Burgundy, but it is new for Muscadet,” Mr. Landron said. “Now, it’s a problem of conscience. Everybody doesn’t have the same conscience.” His wines range from the simple but pure and delicious Amphibolite Nature, named after a soil of green-black rocks, to the complex Le Fief du Breil, a vineyard mostly of orthogneiss, which makes tightly wound, long-lived wines full of character. The latter half of the 20th century was not kind to Muscadet. The postwar diet of science and technology, which gave farmers chemical pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers, along with mechanized tools for harvesting and wine production, largely allowed the big négociants and cooperatives that dominate Muscadet to build a high-volume, low-margin business. As with Beaujolais and sherry in Spain, businesses built in similar ways, that model has proved not to be sustainable.“The future of Muscadet is maybe not to be the biggest but to be the smallest,” Mr. Landron said. Mr. Brégeon, a child of the ’60s and still something of a rabble-rouser, assails the common use of purchased yeast rather than the yeast indigenous to their vineyards and cellars, and is almost offended by the machines that harvest the vast majority of Muscadet grapes. The best wines generally come from grapes harvested by hand.“Machine harvesting results in oxidation almost immediately,” he said in his cluttered cellar under his house. “No wonder they tell you to drink Muscadet young.” His 1989 (by the way, from gabbro, a hard black granite) was wonderfully fresh and delicious, full of rich, stony flavors.Mr. Van Herck said that making great Muscadet required the same production costs as Burgundy. “But we don’t fetch the same price,” he said.Pierre-Marie Luneau put it another way: One hectare (about 2.47 acres) of good vineyard land in Muscadet sells for about $13,500; that same hectare in Sancerre sells for about $400,000. “We must change the orientation of Muscadet,” he added. “It’s too big — 80 percent of the wines sold are from négociants.”Production has already begun to shrink. In 2007, he said, almost 30,000 acres of grapes were farmed for Muscadet. In 2014, it’s closer to 22,000 acres. He suggested 13,000 to 15,000 acres would be ideal. The Luneau-Papin wines are superb, especially the L d’Or, made from old vines on granite soils. The 2002 L d’Or was focused and pure, tasting of minerals and sweet grass. Even at the level of winemaking Luneau-Papin maintains, Mr. Luneau says he can’t be as quality conscious as he would like. He would like to harvest all grapes by hand, but says he must do a third by machine. “We don’t have enough pickers, or enough money yet,” he said. Bernard Chéreau of Chéreau Carré, an excellent producer and a small négociant, is optimistic about the future of Muscadet, at least incrementally.“Twenty years ago all Muscadet was sold after one or two years,” he said. “After 2000, more growers understood Muscadet could age and develop complexity beyond the young and fresh wines.”He produces excellent wines under the labels Château l’Oiselinière de la Ramée and Comte Leloup de Chasseloir Cuvée de Ceps Centennaires, from the oldest vines. As if to dispel any possible doubts that Muscadet can age, he opened a 1976 Leloup, which was exceptional, nutty with aromas of truffles and caramel yet with a fine mineral quality that lasted an eternity in the mouth. The future of Muscadet may not be entirely white wine. Marc Ollivier makes small amounts of excellent red wines, as do a few other producers. But not one is as experimental as Mr. Van Herck of l’Écu, who is making small lots of several wines in amphora, as well as some superb reds of cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc and pinot noir.“The future is both red and white wines,” he said. “Look at Anjou,” he said, referring to another Loire region to the east. “They had a reputation for poor wines, but now they’re making great table wines. Why? Because they’re making them with conviction.”Top Muscadet ProducersHere are some of the best producers of Muscadet available in the United States.ANDRÉ-MICHEL BRÉGEON Rich, substantial, precise, textured wines. (Kermit Lynch Wine Merchant, Berkeley, Calif.)CHÉREAU-CARRÉ A good range of wines, particularly those labeled Comte Leloup du Château de Chasseloir. (De Maison Selections, Chapel Hill, N.C.)DOMAINE DE L’ÉCU Excellent Muscadet cuvées, along with some experimental whites and reds. (Polaner Selections, Mount Kisco, N.Y.)JO LANDRON/DOMAINE DE La LOUVETRIE Wines of great purity and expression. (Martin Scott Wines, Lake Success, N.Y.)DOMAINE PIERRE LUNEAU-PAPIN Wide range of fine wines, particularly L d’Or and Terre de Pierre. (Louis/Dressner Selections, New York)MARC OLLIVIER/DOMAINE DE LA PÉPIÈRE Exceptional wines, especially the structured Clos des Briords and the vivid Clisson. (Louis/Dressner Selections)Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.Advertisement