https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/smarter-living/work-less-youll-get-so-much-more-done.html
Work Less. You’ll Get So Much More Done. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1494
AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim HerreraWelcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. Editor Tim Herrera emails readers once a week with tips and advice on living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox every Monday morning.Let’s start with a question: Are you really that busy?How much of your day are you actually working, and how much of it are you doing a little work, a little internetting, a little snacking, a little gchatting, a little texting and a little drifting off?If you’re like most people (ahem), you can probably relate: The average American worker wastes around 50 minutes at work every day, according to a study last year from the National Bureau of Economic Research.The thing is, that’s O.K.! Taking time for yourself is one of the keys to being able to focus more and ultimately be more productive. The real problem is that we castigate ourselves for resting at work, which leads to us being less strategic about it, when really we should embrace it.The best place to start is our guide on how to make the most of your workday.A few things to keep in mind: Give yourself permission to actually take breaks. Resting at work is one of the best ways to stay creative and productive. Your brain is a muscle and it gets tired, so running it nonstop without letting it rest hurts your ability to stay on task. Getting up and walking around will also do wonders for your stress and overall health. My advice: Go all-in and take more naps at work.Once you’re a pro at taking breaks during the day, step it up and start taking Fridays “off” for yourself. Here are tips on how to do that from our friends at Growthlab. Not to go to the movies (but hey, no judgment), but to improve some part of yourself that will make you better at your job. Instead of forcing yourself to “work” on Fridays when that really means sorta-working-sorta-waiting-for-the-weekend, turn that time into something you and your work will actually benefit from.On the other end of the spectrum we have power hours, which Lifehacker recommends, and they’re exactly what they sound like: Focus like crazy for an hour. If you’re in the zone, keep at it, if not, take a break because you’ve more than earned one. (And if you really want to get deep: Create an energy map of your week. This will help you figure out your peak productivity times so you can schedule around them — maybe a good time for a power hour, hmm?)What’s your strategy for doing more in less time? Or where do you fail at that?Email me at tim@nytimes.com, or tweet me at @timherrera. Have a great week!— Tim• A Smarter Way to Clean Your Home: Take this guided tour of your home — from the kitchen and bathroom to the bedroom and living areas — to learn the basic rules of cleaning as well as some tips and short cuts that will help you clean thoroughly and efficiently, starting now.• Why You Should Learn to Say ‘No’ More Often: When we dole out an easy yes instead of a difficult no, we tend to overcommit our time, our energy and even our finances.• A Beginner’s Guide to Biking to Work: The right preparation, from staying clean to freshening up at your destination, can make all the difference in your ride and your outlook.• Take Naps at Work. Apologize to No One: Supercharge your productivity by scheduling in some down time.• Robocalls Flooding Your Cellphone? Here’s How to Stop Them: Experts recommend a multifaceted approach: Don’t answer unknown numbers, use call-blocking apps and report unwanted calls to the government.• The Benefits of Talking to Yourself: Self-talk is sometimes looked at as just an eccentric quirk, but research has found that it can influence behavior and cognition.• Take better summer Instagrams.• Unexpected guests? Here’s what not to do.• Control your negative thoughts.• Create small habits to prep for more consequential ones.• Beat financial jealousy.• Spot the logical fallacy!• Let’s learn about F.I.B.E.R.: Financial independence before early retirement.• Need a side-hustle? Try background acting.• Traveling this summer? Get the right gear.• Be more self-aware.• You know how sometimes scenes in action movies look jerky? Here’s why.Advertisement