https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/02/t-magazine/urban-meditation-destinations-los-angeles-new-york.html
Three’s a Trend: Urban Meditation Destinations - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1537
AdvertisementSupported byOn WellnessBy Stacy SuayaInspired by their own love of conscious quietude, a trio of women in Los Angeles and New York are bringing nirvana to the jaded masses.Three-month-old MNDFL is the brainchild of 31-year-old Ellie Burrows, who found it difficult to meditate in her own home, filled with all its familiar distractions. With the help of a friend — Lodro Rinzler, now her Chief Spiritual Officer and partner — and the interior design service Homepolish, she transformed the ground floor of an 1837 Greenwich Village townhouse into a cozy modern cocoon. All four major schools of Tibetan Buddhism are represented, as well as Shambhala, Theravada and Zen traditions. Or, if your alpha waves prefer, MNDFL also teaches Vedic and Kundalini. 10 East 8th Street, New York, mndflmeditation.com.Wedged in Los Angeles’s design-fertile District La Brea, the Den’s cozy vibes are thanks to a mosaic of succulents, cognac leather sofas and traditional zafu cushions. Its owner Tal Rabinowitz, a former NBC executive, opened the space yesterday with classes like the AM Energizer and the candlelit Evening Unwind, and workshops focusing on business success — and self-compassion. S. La Brea Ave, Los Angeles, denmeditation.com.Several years ago, the former Vogue and Glamour editor Suze Yalof Schwartz found herself asking, “Where is the Drybar of meditation?” So she set up Unplug, offering 30- to 45-minute meditation classes, designed to help busy Angelenos find midday mindfulness. Bathed in violet light inspired by James Turrell, the sessions are taught by the likes of Mallika Chopra (daughter of Deepak), Davidji and Steve Ross. The waiting area’s gift shop offers other paths to zen, with insightful books, Voyage et Cie candles and crystals from Arizona selected by her “Crystal Pharmacist.” 12401 Wilshire Blvd #101, Los Angeles, unplugmeditation.com.Advertisement