https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/29/theater/review-its-the-audience-thats-captured-by-caught.html
Review: It’s the Audience That’s Captured by ‘Caught’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1749
AdvertisementSupported byBy Laura Collins-HughesBy the time we see the tidy little jail cell, it looks familiar in its particulars: the tall black bars, the narrow cot encased in bright white linens, a toilet on the right, a round-faced clock on the rear wall. Hanging below the clock is a small ring of keys.On the way to our seats at “Caught,” Christopher Chen’s intricately constructed, unrelentingly destabilizing puzzle of a play about the anatomy of truth and the provocative power of illusion — presented by the Play Company at La MaMa — we passed through a fragment of a gallery exhibition about the cell.In the photos of solitary people behind its bars, no one looks terribly imprisoned. As the wall text and a gaggle of displayed printouts explain, an artist named Lin Bo built the cell in his Brooklyn art studio, then advertised it on Airbnb for $1 a night. He got a lot of takers.Now here he is, an art star on the rise, to talk about his work as a dissident Conceptual artist in China and the grueling imprisonment that followed his organizing of a mass “imaginary protest” commemorating the Tiananmen Square massacre.The story that the sympathetic Lin Bo (Louis Ozawa Changchien) tells is not what it appears to be. Neither is much else in this ever-shifting play, directed with exquisite precision by Lee Sunday Evans, and slyly designed every step of the way. (The set is by Arnulfo Maldonado; lighting by Barbara Samuels; sound and music by Jeremy S. Bloom.)“We cannot stop questioning any truth that is put before us,” an incandescently contrarian artist named Wang Min (Jennifer Lim) says a few scenes in, when all that we’ve seen so far — I will keep the details sparse in order not to spoil the experience — has been sufficiently undermined.To her, a crucial point is that the “rules of truth” depend on the medium: The rules are different in journalism from those in theater, for example. That, she says, is how the monologuist Mike Daisey got into so much trouble when he presented his show “The Agony and the Ecstasy of Steve Jobs” as nonfiction on Ira Glass’s public radio program, “This American Life.”Not that she condemns Mr. Daisey for misrepresenting his piece, about conditions for workers making Apple products in China; she’s actually rather snarky about Mr. Glass.With the questions it raises about honesty, invention and what we as a society are willing to condemn, the Daisey kerfuffle is at the heart of “Caught,” which is partly about American storytellers — artists and journalists alike — as tourists of suffering, exploiting the pain of people elsewhere for a more prominent spot in the cultural conversation.It’s also about gullibility: our willingness to ignore details that are either too perfect to be real or so flagrantly wrong that they’d tip us off if only we weren’t so hungry to hear a good story. If only we weren’t so eager for tales that confirm what we already imagine, particularly about other cultures.But “Caught” makes the case, too, for the social and creative need for lies — for deviating from what a reporter (Leslie Fray) calls “the standard parameters of truth.”As perceived realities dissolve, the one thing spectators can be sure of is that they are inside a production that is also a kind of art installation, and that it is messing with them. Even when the performance is over, they may look around warily, unsure if this is truly the end, unwilling to believe.This information was last updated on Aug. 27, 2018Advertisement