https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/07/books/review/rachel-kushner-mars-room.html
Rachel Kushner’s ‘The Mars Room’ Offers a Blackly Comic Take on Prison Life - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2167
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Charles McGrathTHE MARS ROOMBy Rachel Kushner339 pp. Scribner. $27.Rachel Kushner’s second novel, “The Flamethrowers,” instantly established her as one of the most gifted writers of her generation — on the same tier as Jennifer Egan and the two Jonathans, Franzen and Lethem. As the title suggests, it was a flamboyant book, brilliant to a point just short of showoffiness, and it somehow managed to fuse together sex, motorcycle racing, Italian labor strife and the New York art world of the 1970s. It made everyone’s Top 10 list, was a finalist for a 2013 National Book Award (I was one of the judges) and quickly got snapped up by the movies.Now we have her much-anticipated third novel, “The Mars Room,” and though it, too, has already been optioned, it couldn’t be more different from “The Flamethrowers” — or, for that matter, from Kushner’s first book, “Telex From Cuba,” also an N.B.A. finalist. That was a historical novel about some American families living in Cuba in the mid-1950s, just before the Castro revolution. It was so earnest and evocative, so meticulously researched (with walk-on parts for Hemingway, both Castro brothers and Desi and Lucy), that it almost felt like a throwback. The one hint that the author might be up to something more original was a subplot involving an exotic dancer named Rachel K (no coincidence, surely), who turns out, like her novelist creator, to be both an illusionist and an observer who misses nothing.“The Mars Room” is much smaller in scope than either of its predecessors, and seemingly more modest, with less swagger in the writing. It’s a page turner all the same, and in some ways more affecting than the other books. It’s a prison novel, of all things, set mostly in a place called the Stanville Women’s Correctional Facility, in California’s Central Valley, and except to readers who don’t get Netflix, will immediately bring to mind the hit series “Orange Is the New Black.” But Stanville is a much darker place than that show’s minimum-security facility, and the novel is both more blackly comic and more knowing about prison life. You can learn from it how to communicate with another cell through the plumbing and how to brew pruno, or prison moonshine, or whip up a prison cheesecake using Sprite and nondairy creamer. Only the losers, the prisoners with no money, eat in the chow hall, it turns out; the rest dine in their cells on junk food and ramen noodles purchased from the commissary.The novel’s main character is Romy Hall, a 29-year-old serving two life sentences, plus six years. I won’t reveal what lands her in jail, except to say she’s guilty but that there are extenuating circumstances ignored by her hapless, fumbling public defender. Romy is hardly an innocent, though. Growing up in the unfashionable Sunset District of San Francisco — described in great detail by Kushner: the fog, the clamminess, the beach bonfires, the sticky-floored Irish bars — she becomes an almost feral street kid, drinking, shoplifting, doing drugs and thinking about selling them, all before she’s barely pubescent.Romy is bright enough but drifts through high school getting high, and afterward makes her living by giving lap dances at a strip bar called the Mars Room, a place so seedy, she says, that “if you’d showered you had a competitive edge” and “if your tattoos weren’t misspelled you were hot property.” Except for an art teacher she takes up with for a while, her taste in men runs to dirtbags, and with one of them, the doorman at another strip bar, she has a child, Jackson, who is 7 when the novel begins. He’s a sweet, charming boy, and she loves him after her fashion, but is at best an indifferent mother. Jackson spends so much time fobbed off on a neighboring Hispanic family that he starts speaking Spanish. On what will prove to be her last Thanksgiving as a free woman, Romy parks him with a babysitter and spends the day with one of her Mars Room regulars.Part of Kushner’s achievement here is that she makes this character, for all her shortcomings, so appealing. Romy’s narration darts around in a voice that is tough, cynical, a little defensive at times, but ruthlessly honest and without a trace of self-pity. She has some of the bruised sweetness of Denis Johnson’s alkies and junkies in “Jesus’ Son.” That Romy is white makes her something of an exception at Stanville. (White prisoners, she says sarcastically, tend to be either drunken drivers or baby killers, and in fact she has a baby-killer roommate, the aptly named Laura Lipp, who never shuts up.) Many of the others, some of whom she eventually bonds with in a kind of extended prison family, come from even worse circumstances: You feel that they were practically programmed to wind up in jail. But Kushner imparts to them, too, a redemptive gloss of dignity and individuality. Romy’s best friends are Conan, a trash-talking trans man so masculine-seeming that he gets sent to a male prison for a while; and the gentle, philosophical Sammy, so at home in prison that she invariably manages to be sent back there. She thinks of her paroles not as departures but as vacations.Some of Stanville life we get to see through the eyes of a character named Gordon Hauser. Except for the Fudds, as Conan calls the guards, he’s one of very few non-prisoners in the book, but in his own way he’s almost as confined. He’s a graduate-school dropout, who never finished a Ph.D. thesis on Thoreau, and after a stint as an adjunct at a community college settles into teaching G.E.D. classes in prison, because the money’s better and it seems easier. Lonely and depressed, he commutes to Stanville from an isolated cabin in the Sierra foothills, where he spends way too much time studying the journals of Ted Kaczynski. Gordon is well-intentioned but morally a little obtuse — a stand-in for the reader, perhaps — and his gradual discovery of the mindlessness and injustice of prison life, especially on death row, is one of the book’s plot levers. Kushner says of the lifers: “All of them were people who suffered and along the way of their suffering they made others suffer, and Gordon could not see that making them suffer lifelong would accrue to justice. It added new harm to old.”The other thing driving the plot is the death, about halfway through, of Romy’s mother, who though herself a lousy parent, has been taking care of Jackson, who is now catapulted into “the system.” Because she is no longer his guardian, legally speaking, Romy can find out nothing about him, and the more she is rebuffed by legalese and bureaucratic mumbo-jumbo, the more she anguishes.“The Mars Room” makes you share her frustration. It’s one of those books that enrage you even as they break your heart, and in its passion for social justice you can finally discern a connection between all three of Kushner’s novels. Both “Telex From Cuba” and “The Flamethrowers” paid glancing attention to the downtrodden and the exploited: sugar-cane cutters in “Telex,” Brazilian rubber gatherers and Italian factory workers in “Flamethrowers.” In “The Mars Room” the neglected become the focus, and it’s apparent that Kushner’s imagination, almost Dickensian in its amplitude, also embraces some of Dickens’s reformist zeal. In its small way, “The Mars Room” does for prison what “Hard Times” and “Nicholas Nickleby” did for 19th-century education.“The Flamethrowers” was in love with speed and with anarchy, with moments — during a strike, an urban riot, a New York City blackout — when the rules are suspended and everything is up for grabs. “The Mars Room,” on the other hand, chafes against the slowness and sameness of time and the oppressiveness of a system that in the name of “justice” dooms our poorest citizens to lives of incarceration. It’s not giving away too much to say that, like most good prison novels, this one ends with an escape. There are two, actually, one clearly based on Richard Matt and David Sweat’s 2015 breakout in upstate New York. The other is a more bookish kind of escape, and culminates in a moment of transcendence achieved mostly by literary style and authorial sleight of hand. It’s eloquent and moving, but to me, at least, it seems a little forced and wishful. The rest of Kushner’s novel is so powerful and realistic you come away convinced that all such escapes are illusory, and that even for those who get out, prison is still a life sentence.Charles McGrath, a former editor of the Book Review, is working on an edition of Donald Barthelme’s work for the Library of America.Advertisement