https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/07/reader-center/jenna-wortham-new-york-times-magazine-still-processing.html
Jenna Wortham on the Exhilarating Work That Leaves Her ‘Naked and Shivering’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
105
AdvertisementSupported byBEHIND THE BYLINEInterview by Lara TakenagaThe Reader Center has started a new series of short interviews, Behind the Byline, to introduce you to Times journalists. Is there a reporter, photographer or editor whom you would like to get to know? Tell us in the form below.There are many claims to fame among New York Times journalists, but only one of us has received a note from Beyoncé saying, “Thanks for understanding my heart.”That lifetime bragging right belongs to Jenna Wortham, a staff writer for The Times Magazine and a co-host of the podcast “Still Processing.” Since joining The Times in 2008, she has found a vast, loyal audience for her original takes on pop culture, technology and race. And on social media, where you may know her as @jennydeluxe, she has become something of a cult figure to her hundreds of thousands of followers.[Read Jenna’s piece about Beyoncé and Jay-Z in the magazine’s Music Issue.]Here, Jenna talks about being a young woman of color in journalism, the challenges of social media and her love for a certain reality show.You’re a beloved (and often hilarious) presence on Twitter and Instagram, where you’ve attracted huge followings. How do you think about your life on social media?I try to be extremely aware of my urges to contribute to social media and of the way it feels to observe others’ highly curated looking glasses. Why do I want to share? What does it mean to parcel out bits of myself for consumption? What does it mean to consume others’ bits?I really love getting insights into the highs and lows of the human experience and, at the same time, am aware that we’re being coerced into participating by companies that trade on our emotions and impulses.At social media’s best, I’m laughing alongside some of the most interesting and innovative D.I.Y. creators of my time. At its worst, I’m experiencing a desperate longing for a life that is not mine. That’s a hard spectrum to travel along on a daily basis.What obstacles have you faced as a young person of color working in journalism?For a long time, the issues that concerned me and my communities the most felt difficult to get other people to rally around: pay inequality, the exploitation of marginalized people, digital imperialism, skepticism of Silicon Valley’s values, and wellness and mental health. These things are now of the utmost interest, and that is the most satisfying evolution to observe and participate in.How do you juggle being a writer and a podcast co-host?Podcasting requires an intense amount of collaboration that is fairly foreign to me as a writer. The real-time externalization of thoughts is a different skill set from what I’ve cultivated in my 10 years as a reporter. I feel like I’m learning how to communicate differently, how to work on a team and how to allow myself to feel exposed while a work is in progress. You feel naked and shivering all the time, and it’s thoroughly exhilarating.I bring some of that fearlessness to my writing — I take more leaps and risks and chances, and it feels less scary when they aren’t successful.How do you spend your time when you’re off duty?Off-duty is such an interesting concept! Are any of us ever off?I spend so much of my time invigorated by the ideas swirling around me. I read, I see films and art, I listen to podcasts and talks while I cook, and I see live music and local D.J.s. I practice reiki and do bodywork. I engage in other kinds of personal and spiritual development.Many of my friends are creative types and makers, so we’re always exchanging ideas and getting worked up around the dinner table. I feel really grateful and lucky to make a living doing what feeds me: synthesizing ideas.But I know what you’re really asking. Whenever I have a down moment, I like to take baths with lots of magnesium salt and dried calendula, and to spend time with friends or their babies. Intimate relationships are my lifeblood.I also travel whenever I can. Last year, I went to the South of France and meditated and swam in the Mediterranean Sea. That rejuvenated me to deal with the stressors of daily life. In a few weeks I’m going to Greece to do something similar.If you had to choose another job, in journalism or not, what would it be?Is there a job where you get to be on the beach all day? I’d choose that. I am a water sign and love being near the ocean. Maybe I’d be a filmmaker and work on “Planet Earth: Blue Planet III.”What books have most influenced your work?Books about fearless women who persevered in their fields because they knew their higher purpose was to be in service of equality and civil rights: “Eye on the Struggle: Ethel Payne, the First Lady of the Black Press,” for instance, and “At the Dark End of the Street: Black Women, Rape, and Resistance — A New History of the Civil Rights Movement From Rosa Parks to the Rise of Black Power.” They help remind me to keep going when I get overwhelmed and feel like giving up.“The Black Book,” an anthology edited by Toni Morrison, and the publications of Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, started by Barbara Smith, have influenced my work on a visual anthology called “Black Futures” that I’m doing with Kimberly Drew. It will come out in 2020.And Renee Gladman’s books about the imaginary place Ravicka are profoundly reshaping how I think about language.What’s something that readers would be surprised to learn about you?I spend more time offline than online. I don’t have a value judgment about screen time; it’s just that I’ve finally reached a point in my life and career where I spend a lot of time generating inspiration and ideas, not scrolling for them, and that is such a luxury.Also, I love “Survivor.” It’s so good!Illustration by Rebecca ClarkeA note to readers who are not subscribers: This article from the Reader Center does not count toward your monthly free article limit.Follow the @ReaderCenter on Twitter for more coverage highlighting your perspectives and experiences and for insight into how we work.Lara Takenaga is a staff editor for the Reader Center.  @LaraTakenaga Advertisement