https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/15/dining/champagne-dom-perignon-moet-louis-roederer.html
With Champagne, Big Can Be Beautiful, Too - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
576
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovOver the last 15 years, the rising appeal of grower Champagne, wine produced by small farmers who grow their own grapes, has transformed our notion of what the region’s wines can be.These farmers demonstrated that Champagne could be as much a distinctive expression of place as any other great wine, rather than the smoothly consistent product portrayed in so many marketing campaigns, blended to meet a house style year after year by consummate cellar masters. The movement effectively splattered vineyard dirt over Champagne’s urbane, tuxedoed image, redirecting the narrative from the cellar and placing it back on the farm.On the whole, this movement has been a tremendous boon for Champagne, infusing the region with much-needed energy, greatly improving the overall quality and restoring the notion that Champagne is a wine, not solely a luxury object and status symbol.But as the grower Champagnes have become more popular, the movement has had an unintended consequence: a widespread dismissal of the big Champagne houses as dull, stodgy and uninteresting.In many wine-loving restaurants all over the country, the selection of grower Champagnes has greatly increased over the past decade while the number of big-house Champagnes has dwindled to a token one or two, if any. Just as cutting-edge sommeliers began to turn their backs on Bordeaux 10 years ago, so too have they rejected big-house Champagnes.Let me be clear: This is not a good thing. I have been among the most ardent supporters of grower Champagnes, first writing about them in 2003. The point then was to open people’s minds to another idea of what Champagne could be. It was never to encourage a different sort of closed-mindedness.That seems to be exactly what has occurred. As a result, consumers are missing out on wonderful Champagnes, which, because they are produced by the big brands, no longer conform to what is fashionable.The dismissal of big-house Champagnes stems in part from two vast generalizations. First, that these Champagnes are essentially marketing and money grabs, products of neglectful agriculture and expedient winemaking, answerable only to the bean counters who run the corporations that own these houses. Second, that real Champagne comes only from small, carefully tended vineyards, and offers a distinct sense of place.The first is clearly an exaggeration. While many of the big names, like Charles Heidsieck, Krug and Ruinart, are owned by conglomerates, others like Billecart-Salmon, Philipponnat and Taittinger are family-run. Yet the criticism is not without reason.For many years, the big houses had little competition and few reasons to invest in careful viticulture, or winemaking, especially with their entry-level nonvintage bottles. Some of the biggest producers didn’t actually make all of their wines themselves; they supplemented their production by buying huge quantities of Champagnes that had already been produced by cooperatives or farmers and then slapping their labels on the bottles.This still goes on, and it’s lamentable. But whether they were always conscientious producers or shamed into it by the example of the growers, many big brands today are producing excellent, distinctive Champagnes, even at the entry level. Though these wines may not be clear expressions of terroir, they are beautiful and delicious nonetheless and ought to be embraced.As for the notion that all grower Champagnes convey a distinctive sense of place, this is not always true, especially for entry-level wines. They may be blends of grapes grown in several different communes, and from several different vintages. They, too, can be delicious.Still, the best blended entry-level grower Champagnes will rarely have the depth and complexity that you will find in, say, a Charles Heidsieck Brut Réserve, one of my favorite nonvintage Champagnes: vibrant, energetic, and complex in a way that you rarely see at its price level of $45 to $60.What makes the Heidsieck so good? First of all, it is made not simply from a blend of wines from many different villages. It also includes a blend of older wines, 40 percent, in fact, which contributes to its complexity.Because of an admirable transparency on the label, I know that my bottle of nonvintage Heidsieck was laid down in its cellars in 2009 and not disgorged  until 2015, giving it six years of aging — longer than many vintage Champagnes. Few growers have either the backlog of wines to create such intricate blends or the wherewithal to hang onto bottles for that long.Let’s again be clear: Though the presence of the growers has increased, they still account for only a small fraction of the Champagne consumed in the United States. In 2015, the growers shipped 1.1 million bottles of Champagne to the United States, almost triple the amount they shipped in 2003, as against about 18 million shipped by the big houses, roughly the same as in 2003, according to Comité Champagne, the group that promotes the region’s wines.As with the craft beer movement, the influence of the growers far exceeds their actual presence in the marketplace. Their rising popularity has pushed big houses to concentrate far more on viticulture, for one thing.Louis Roederer, a house that is producing wines of uniformly top quality, now owns a high percentage of the vineyards it uses, about 600 acres, almost all of which are farmed organically or biodynamically. Only its nonvintage Brut Premier is made with a percentage of grapes not grown by the estate. It is nonetheless elegant and harmonious, with great finesse.As for its other wines, I love Roederer’s lithe, precise 2010 rosé, its saline 2009 blanc de blancs and its intense, energetic 2009 Brut Nature. Its top-of-the-line Cristal is always a great wine.While many houses do dwarf the growers, not all are necessarily much bigger than some of the larger vignerons. The superb Jacquesson produces about 350,000 bottles annually, and the excellent Philipponnat about 600,000. By contrast, a very fine grower like Pierre Gimonnet et Fils produces about 250,000, though many vignerons make fewer than 100,000.A small house like Charles Heidsieck or Billecart-Salmon makes around two million bottles annually, while midlevel Duval-Leroy and Taittinger may produce closer to five million. That is nothing compared with Veuve Cliquot’s 18 million bottles and Moët-Chandon’s astonishing 35 million.Of Moët’s 35 million, a few million or so are Dom Pérignon, perhaps the most famous Champagne brand in the world. Dom Pérignon does not confirm production figures. While Champagne snobs who confuse scarcity with quality love to disparage Dom Pérignon, it’s an astoundingly great wine despite the quantity made.At that top level — whether Dom or Cristal, Krug or Salon, Bollinger R.D. or Taittinger Comtes de Champagne, Philipponnat Clos des Goisses or Heidsieck Blanc des Millénaires — the quality is uniformly high.Conversely, the growers have become so popular that importers are seeking more so that they can offer one in their portfolio. Many are superb, though not all of them. As more grower brands emerge, I taste more that are rustic, awkward and unbalanced.All categories of wine offer both good and bad. The point is to celebrate a diversity of styles and to be selective in each category.With Champagne that means embracing both the jagged, distinctive expressions of the growers and the complex depth offered by the big houses. Nobody has to like every sort of wine, but when a genre like the big Champagne houses is buttressed by a history of depth and accomplishments, it cannot be dismissed.EMAIL asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @Eric Asimov.Advertisement