https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/24/books/review/love-hanne-orstavik-scandinavian-novels.html
Cold Cases: Three Scandinavian Novels Explore Chilling Emotional Territory - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2168
AdvertisementSupported byThe ShortlistBy Claire Vaye WatkinsLOVE By Hanne Orstavik Translated by Martin Aitken 125 pp. Archipelago. Paper, $17.“Love,” a trim and electrifying novel, is set over the course of a single winter night in a small town in northern Norway. Orstavik shimmers between 8-year-old Jon and his single mother, Vibeke, on the eve of Jon’s ninth birthday (an occasion of which only one of them seems aware). Each sets out for the evening without the other realizing it, Jon to sell raffle tickets for a school fund-raiser and Vibeke to visit the library. Finding it closed, Vibeke resigns herself to dropping by a ramshackle carnival instead. Jon’s plans, too, get away from him, and soon both story lines are seeped in tension and dread.The real-time urgency of “Love” is undergirded by the present tense and made incandescent by Orstavik’s seemingly effortless omniscient perspective, sometimes switching between Jon’s mind and Vibeke’s from sentence to sentence. The pronouns work overtime to signal shifts of perspective in Aitken’s taut translation from Norwegian, pivoting elegantly from Vibeke to Jon and back as they brave everyday threats.Orstavik’s mastery of perspective and clean, crackling sentences prevent sentimentality or sensationalism from trailing this story of a woman and her accidentally untended child. Both of them long for love, but the desire lines of the book are beautifully crooked. Jon wants his mother, and to be let in out of the cold. Meanwhile, Vibeke pursues Tom, a carnival worker, and revises her standards for an erotic encounter steadily downward.Vibeke is a mesmerizing character, Orstavik sketching the contours of her loneliness within a fun fair too rinky-dink to have a Ferris wheel. We watch, hypnotized yet removed, as she turns from the innocent love of her child and sifts through Tom’s silent scraps: “He looks down into his beer and a curl of blond hair falls against his cheek with an affirmative bounce, a little yes.”Vibeke’s sensual longing is a hunger that might offer deeper wisdom: “He’s a man for me, she thinks. … The insight is physical. The body can be trusted.” Bodies are not so trustworthy for young Jon, lured by a witchy figure into a warm car. The primeval darkness of the forest looms, biting as the cold that seems a character throughout this excellent novel of near misses.WAIT, BLINK By Gunnhild Oyehaug Translated by Kari Dickson 276 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25Love is pursued straightforwardly in “Wait, Blink,” Oyehaug’s first novel to appear in English and the follow-up to her widely lauded story collection, “Knots.” Every chapter offers a different consciousness: Sigrid, a dreamy young literature student; Kare Tryvle, the 43-year-old writer Sigrid adores; Wanda, Kare’s bassist ex; a filmmaker named Linnea and her producer, Robert; Viggo, “a dreamer, a thinker, a lone wolf.” Each character is striving for, and/or reeling from, a heterosexual relationship. The standout is Trine, a performance artist and new mother who is forced to cancel her “masturbation performance” at the opening of an exhibition of “Women in Norwegian Art” when faced with a breast-pumping emergency. Trine relocates her performance to the museum’s public bathroom, where she milks herself into a toilet. It’s an art monster move of the first order, but Trine is too exhausted and angry afterward to bask in her audience’s patronizing admiration.“Wait, Blink” feels most organic in these moments of squalor and when its plotlines intersect, an impressive feat given that its narrators revel in serendipity and coincidence. Allusions to Dante and Cervantes clang interestingly against the novel’s lively pop-culture riffs, among them a breakup occasioned by a feminist interpretation of “Kill Bill Vol. 2” and a scatological spoof of Sofia Coppola’s “Lost in Translation.” The form that most influences these pages seems to be the screenplay, and despite her stylish intelligence and sparkplug characters Oyehaug struggles to scratch the narrative’s cinematic veneer. “Wait, Blink” has already been made into a film.[ Read our reviews of “T. Singer” and “Armand V.,” newly translated novels by Norwegian master Dag Solstad ]MIRROR, SHOULDER, SIGNAL By Dorthe Nors Translated by Misha Hoekstra 188 pp. Graywolf. Paper, $16.Sonja is a childless 40-something translator of misogynistic thrillers devoured by her Danish countrymen. She longs for her home in rural Jutland, a rustic landscape of sold-off farms, aggressive drivers, rye fields and what’s left of Denmark’s natural sublime. Cosmopolitan Copenhagen once offered Sonja cultural refuge, but now “the parties have turned into receptions.” Fleeing a meditation retreat in a deer park hosted by her New Age masseuse, Sonja realizes that paid touch and urban simulacra of wilderness have worn thin.As with the best books, plot summary fails to bottle the lightning of “Mirror, Shoulder, Signal.” Despite chronic vertigo inherited from her mother, Sonja wants to learn to drive, and most of the external friction of this novel stems from her decision to register a formal complaint about her ineffectual driving-school instructor. The mind is Nors’s landscape, and yearning her true subject. Sonja’s is an objectless yearning, deeper than nostalgia. Page after addictive page, Nors pushes Sonja beyond her class betrayal and survivor’s guilt, beyond anger at her mother for encouraging her independence, into and, miraculously, out of a profound dislocation of the soul embodied by her vertigo, which bursts forth in a gorgeous, breathless finale.Nors, author of “So Much for That Winter” and “Karate Chop,” lingers on Sonya’s small acts of heroism: complimenting an ugly baby while its mother shops for plus-sized clothes, composing an honest letter to her housewife sister, offering a tourist directions. Nors gives the invisible woman the dignity of her artful gaze; as Sonja thinks on the masseuse’s table, “It’s wonderful being delved into.” This triumphant novel sounds the depths of women’s unseen strength in a register that reconciles enlightened feminism with working-class rage.Claire Vaye Watkins is the author of “Battleborn” and “Gold, Fame, Citrus.”Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.Advertisement