https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/06/magazine/letter-of-recommendation-pinky-and-the-brain.html
Letter of Recommendation: ‘Pinky and the Brain’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1284
AdvertisementSupported byLetter of RecommendationBy Jonah WeinerDuring an interview I did with Conan O’Brien a while back, we drifted onto the topic of rules: when it was prudent, as a creative person, to flout conventions, and when it made sense to obey them. As O’Brien saw it, only ever flouting, without a healthy dose of obeying, was unsustainable and, on balance, unfunny. To illustrate, he told me a story, one that didn’t make it into the piece I wrote but stuck with me nonetheless: A well-known comedian with a raucous persona, interested in developing his own talk show, once sought O’Brien’s advice. “He showed me a prototype of what it would be: He comes out, he runs through the audience, he’s never in one place. He’s everywhere, he’s nowhere, he’s wearing different clothes, spray-painting on the walls — total anarchy,” O’Brien recalled. “And I said, O.K., here’s my take: You’re a brilliantly funny person, but you need to be constrained, because when you break those constraints, it’s enormously satisfying.”The constraints in a late-night talk show — a hidebound format that O’Brien sabotages almost as fervently as he reveres it — are the desk, the almost-unbudging camera, the sidekick and the suit-and-tie wardrobe. But this principle holds firm, O’Brien believed, across the arts. “It’s the thing I love about rock ’n’ roll,” he said. “Three chords.”“Pinky and the Brain,” a cartoon that aired for half of the 1990s, is a three-chord kind of show, as bound by formal constraints as they come. Before spinning off into its own half-hour slot, the series began life as the best thing about “Animaniacs,” an exuberantly unhinged variety cartoon executive-produced by Steven Spielberg and packed with non-sequitur punch lines, meta-level laughs and so many showbiz in-jokes that you could forget this was a show nominally made for kids. “Pinky and the Brain” stood out for its ingenuity and extreme economy. The show has only two recurring characters to speak of — the talking lab mice of the title — and precisely one plot, set into motion in the opening moments of each installment with the same 23 words: “Gee, Brain, what do you want to do tonight?” “The same thing we do every night, Pinky. Try to take over the world.”That the mice will deploy some scheme for world domination is the lone narrative motor, and that their failure is guaranteed provides not only the inevitable third-act kicker but also the condition of the show’s continued existence: a reset button that returns the mice to the lab to plot again. The pair is at once idiosyncratic and archetypal, in a vaudevillian kind of way. Brain is a hyperintelligent, short-tempered straight man voiced by a guy doing a stentorian Orson Welles impression; Pinky is daffy and sweet and speaks in an over-the-top Cockney accent.They are given no back story beyond a stray line in the theme song (“Their genes have been spliced”), and they learn no lessons by episode’s end. Characterization takes the form, instead, of kid-friendly, broken-record repetition. In every episode, while unveiling the plan at hand, Brain will ask Pinky, “Are you pondering what I’m pondering?” — a question so ritualized that fans refer to it by “AYPWIP” — to which Pinky will offer a reliably outré response. “I think so, Brain, but I can’t memorize a whole opera in Yiddish.” “I think so, Brain, but Pete Rose? I mean, can we trust him?” “I think so, but Kevin Costner with an English accent?”The AYPWIP captured, in microcosm, the show’s prevailing dynamic: an endlessly redeployable equation into which the writers could feed increasingly crazy variables. Nowhere was this more palpable than in Brain’s preposterously elaborate plans. In one episode, he endeavors to create his own country, seeking billions of dollars in foreign aid, in order to construct an enormous clothes dryer that will generate world-crippling static cling. In another, he and Pinky masquerade as formerly extinct species in Pittsburgh, exploiting environmental protections to commandeer the steel industry and manufacture a series of giant “magic eye” billboards over the nation’s highways, transfixing drivers and creating a never-ending rush hour.Such Rube Goldbergian absurdity often gave way to satire. Popular culture was a frequent target: Brain’s schemes included creating a hit country song, a romance novel, an inspirational sports movie and, in one of many self-reflexive moments, a beloved children’s-show duo, all in the name of reducing the global population to a state of drooling pliability. Considered in this light, the show’s slavishly repetitive structure stood as its own sly self-critique. Encountering all of this in a piece of ostensible children’s entertainment was, and remains, revelatory.One way to describe art bound tight by rigid constraints is “formulaic.” But while we typically use this word as a slight, “Pinky and the Brain” shows that extreme adherence to formula can spark wild bouts of experimentation, invention and — almost paradoxically, given the atmosphere of overwhelming familiarity — hallucinatory surprise. If it weren’t for the show’s ironclad narrative tethers, after all, its abundant flights of fancy would feel precariously overleveraged, inconsequentially unmoored — merely and manically “random,” like the friend telling you all about his crazy dream, or the amateur improv troupe in which everyone wants to be Will Ferrell at all times. Breaking the rules in comedy, as in art at large, is important, but it can become a cheap fetish, too. Sometimes it’s following them that takes real genius.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement