https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/05/health/readers-respond-the-biggest-loser.html
Readers Respond: ‘The Biggest Loser’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2258
AdvertisementSupported byThe Science of FatBy Marie Tae McDermottAn article on Monday by Gina Kolata about “The Biggest Loser” contestants who are struggling six years later with regaining much of the weight they lost on the show drew a flood of responses from New York Times readers. The article — “After ‘The Biggest Loser,’ Their Bodies Fought to Regain Weight”— explained how the body fights back hard against major weight loss, with changes both to how many calories a person burns when at rest, and levels of some hormones. Readers posted more than 2,500 comments and the article was the most shared on The Times website and Facebook page on Tuesday. Below is a selection of responses, which have been edited for clarity.At last we have persuasive medical evidence that being overweight is a disease rather than a moral failing. And some people appear to be dealt a fat future at birth. My cousin in a thin family was “chubby” from the time she was 3 years old. She has battled to stay thin since she was 10. Doctors have chastised her for eating too much, slapping her with the conventional wisdom that her “excess calories” are the problem. A person of determination and discipline, she had fought hard over the years, dieting for months, exercising by swimming, bicycling and hiking. Dozens of times she has lost the pounds only to see them come back to the point her previous weight has been surpassed. At age 34, she now weighs 285 pounds. At 5’ 5” she is “obese.” To spend time with her can be heartbreaking. As we walk down the street, I watch people regard this gallant woman who has struggled so hard with contempt and disgust. Some even make comments, like “You should be ashamed” or “stop gorging.” Thank goodness she has many people who love her, including a handsome, fit husband (whom she met at the gym). She is a brilliant, wonderful human in a fat body.—SamsaraSo can we stop our cultural tendency to fat-shame people now?—Working Mama in New York CityThis is depressing and more than a bit overwhelming. As someone who has struggled with weight almost all of my adult life, I can’t help but wonder if I am fighting a losing battle or making things worse in the long run. Stay at my current weight (overweight though not obese) or diet and risk lowering my already low metabolism even more? I exercise daily and vigorously though that seems to have little impact on my weight, but have gone on and off heavily restrictive diets for more than 10 years. And it’s true, each time I stop, I gain a bit more weight, so that now I am 20 pounds more than I was 10 years ago.—Ann in El PasoI was 10 years old when I first dieted. I have been dieting all my life. Each time, I regain the weight plus 20 more pounds. The last time, I decided on different goals. I wanted to feel better and move through space more easily rather than lose weight on a scale. I threw my scale away. I focused on what I needed to eat rather than what I should not.—Cyn in New OrleansI lost the weight slowly, probably about a 2 to 3 year span of time, and after reading this I’m glad I did not do it any faster.—ChristinaI was a chubby child, not good at games, unpopular with peers, and embedded in a dysfunctional family. Food was a reliable pleasure and comfort. You are not doing your kid any favors by giving him that bag of chips or Big Gulp, or encouraging him to graze nonstop. So you can’t just go on a diet and then go off. You must change your life. For me, at least, it was worth it.—ACW in New JerseyThe amount of exercise the show uses is unrealistic in the extreme. Slower weight loss and more moderate (brisk walking) exercise would be a more prudent approach. I lost 1 to 2 pounds a week for a total of 45 pounds (I’m 5’ 2”) and have maintained it with some up and down for over eight years. The up and down is never more than five pounds and only happens when I stop weighing myself once per week.—Janet Camp in MilwaukeeI am an M.D. who works with patients to optimize weight loss every day and I teach at Columbia. Eighty percent of my practice is metabolic related. For example, I saw a 20-year-old student about two hours ago who is barely eating (800-1000 calories per day) and exercising for an hour per day (mostly aerobic) just to maintain her mildly overweight build in the face of pre-diabetes. Her body fights her for EVERY pound, EVERY day, ceaselessly. This article is exactly what I see in daily clinically practice — how losing weight is the relatively easy part compared to the chronic battle one has as the body relentlessly tries to return you to the ‘set’ weight it wants.—Joseph Feuerstein, M.D. in Connecticut As a scientist, I do not argue with the data that is collected regarding the slowed metabolism. I have to imagine it has something to do with the pace at which these contestants lose their weight. Looking at Mr. Cahill’s description of his life on the show or during his four months at home, it is simply not a realistic lifestyle, except for people being sponsored by a reality TV show. My biggest concern from this study is that some people will read this and direct the reason for their weight gain completely to ‘something is wrong with my body.’ And while this study appears to say yes there is, there is nothing more hopeless than trying so hard to do something and finding out that it’s not going to work because of something that is out your control. I think this can be very easily interpreted by some to give up and say their obesity it because of their malfunctioning metabolism. That can be very easy to do, but also very dangerous for the individual to give up that pursuit of a healthy lifestyle.—J in New YorkThe elephant in the room is that we are living in a society where food is abundant, and temptations abound. We are bombarded with food commercials on TV. Grocery stores are packed with delicious, high calorie items that we end up buying despite our best intentions. People keep bringing delicious doughnuts and bagels to work and leave them lying around for everyone to eat. I have found that when I go overseas - specifically, to India to see my mother - I lose weight because I just don’t eat junk food, and I don’t miss it either. I also end up walking a lot more over there than I do here. What this article is missing is the psychological and environmental factors that cause addiction to unhealthy foods.— RajS CAStill, it’s not just biology. Rates of obesity are much higher in the United States than the rest of the world. That is the fact that scientists interested in preventing obesity should be researching.—TonyD MichiganOpinionSandra AamodtAdvertisement