https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/14/us/politics/claire-mccaskill-missouri-election-trump.html
McCaskill’s Survival Plan in Pro-Trump Missouri: Stay in the Center - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2632
AdvertisementSupported byBy Thomas KaplanSIKESTON, Mo. — Senator Claire McCaskill freely admits the squeeze she finds herself in these days, with a re-election battle looming next year in a state that President Trump won by 19 points.“Some of you think I’m some tool for the left,” she matter-of-factly told the crowd at a town hall-style meeting here this week. “Some of you think that I’m a sellout because I’m not left enough.”Ms. McCaskill would prefer another label — moderate — or perhaps a longer description: someone who can bring polarized partisans together in the middle and therefore is well worth sending back to Washington, even for voters in a state that has moved decidedly rightward in its politics.As a vulnerable Democrat in an increasingly red state, Ms. McCaskill is hoping that her meet-in-the-middle politics will lead to a third term, even after Mr. Trump’s success last year. But first, she must determine how exactly to approach his presidency.Ms. McCaskill is one of 10 Senate Democrats from states won by Mr. Trump who are up for re-election next year. Republicans are eager for another chance to unseat her after their debacle in 2012, when the Republican nominee, Todd Akin, was doomed by his comment about “legitimate rape.” Her potential challengers include Representative Ann Wagner and Missouri’s attorney general, Josh Hawley.Ms. McCaskill warned the crowd in Sikeston, where conservatism runs deep in the southeastern Bootheel region of the state, of the coming deluge of advertising, which she predicted would not be flattering to her: “I’m going to look like one big old ugly fat cow for about 18 months on your television screen.”She is part of an involuntary club of red-state Democrats who are now being tugged in two directions. Left-leaning constituents and others remain aghast at Mr. Trump and want him to be resisted at every turn. But senators like Ms. McCaskill need a much broader coalition and cannot afford to alienate too many voters who helped send Mr. Trump to the White House.Here in New Madrid County, Ms. McCaskill has a difficult case to make. Mr. Trump won about 72 percent of the vote.One question at the meeting emphasized that challenge: Ms. McCaskill was asked whether she thought the large number of Trump voters in Missouri would hurt her re-election chances.She used the moment to show how she would try to navigate the distance between her own opposition to Mr. Trump and the views of his many fans in her state.“I’ll tell you one thing that drives me crazy: my colleagues in Washington that are from places like California and New York who wanted to look down their nose at Trump voters,” Ms. McCaskill said. “I think that’s a huge mistake.”She told the crowd of more than 100 people that voters who supported Mr. Trump “wanted somebody who would disrupt what’s going on.”“I’m humbled by that election,” she said. “I think I owe those people my time. I think I owe them my respect.”Even with that conciliatory sentiment, Ms. McCaskill did not exempt Mr. Trump from criticism.At another town hall-style meeting, in Hannibal, the boyhood home of Mark Twain, Ms. McCaskill bluntly told her constituents how Mr. Trump’s policies would hurt them.Speaking at the Hannibal Nutrition Center, which provides meals to seniors, Ms. McCaskill warned about what would happen if Mr. Trump’s proposed budget became reality: “This place is out of business.”“One trip to Mar-a-Lago pays for Meals on Wheels in the state of Missouri for two years,” she said, drawing applause. “One trip. So, seriously, Mr. President, can you stay home one weekend so we can hold on to Meals on Wheels and keep people out of nursing homes and keep them in their homes?”Ms. McCaskill cast Mr. Trump’s plans as harmful to rural areas. “There is an irony in that most of the proposals that President Trump has made hurt disproportionately rural Missouri, as opposed to St. Louis and Kansas City,” she said.Dave Robertson, the chairman of the political science department at the University of Missouri-St. Louis, said Ms. McCaskill, a former state auditor, could attract voters by highlighting her work on issues like reducing government waste, rather than “dumping on the president.”“This ain’t Massachusetts,” Mr. Robertson said. “You can’t just say ‘Republicans bad’ and try to hope that you’ll win on that basis.”So far, Ms. McCaskill’s main decisions regarding Mr. Trump have involved his nominees. She has opposed some of his cabinet selections, but has cast fewer “no” votes than most of her Democratic colleagues. She chose to support a filibuster of Mr. Trump’s pick for the Supreme Court, Neil M. Gorsuch, concluding that his opinions showed “a rigid ideology that always puts the little guy under the boot of corporations,” and ultimately voted against his confirmation.At both town halls, which were among eight such meetings she held this week, Ms. McCaskill defended her decision. In Sikeston, she told the crowd that voting in favor of confirmation would have made her re-election easier.Frances Smith, 78, a retired teacher who voted for Mr. Trump and came to the meeting in Sikeston, disagreed with the senator’s opposition to Justice Gorsuch. Ms. Smith said Ms. McCaskill’s fate could be tied to how voters ultimately assessed the Trump presidency.“If Trump blows it, then people might say, ‘Well, O.K., McCaskill, you’re O.K.,’” she said. “But if Trump continues to progress and people approve of him, then she’s probably out.” (She did have one request for the president: “I wish he would stay off of Twitter.”)Nearby, a disagreement between two other attendees showed a different set of pressures facing Ms. McCaskill.Lora Tucker, 39, wanted to know why Ms. McCaskill had voted for several of Mr. Trump’s cabinet nominees. “Why?” she asked. “None of them were qualified.”Patricia Scott, 62, countered, “My guess is because she lives in a conservative state that she wants to win.”Ms. Scott helped start a local group that is part of the Indivisible movement to resist the Trump presidency. But she and Ms. Tucker have very different ideas of what Ms. McCaskill’s resistance should look like.“I want her to resist everything,” Ms. Tucker said.“I want her to pick her battles,” Ms. Scott said.When it comes to the possibility that she might be able to work with Mr. Trump, Ms. McCaskill says one crucial player has been missing in that equation: the president himself.“He won my state by 19 points, and the White House has never reached out to my office,” she said in a brief interview. “Not one time. So if they’re interested in working with Democrats, they really haven’t shown that yet.”As for her chances next year, she suggested that voters who supported Mr. Trump could also wind up voting for her because they “like the idea that there’s a check and balance between the two parties.”To illustrate the state’s electoral dynamics, Ms. McCaskill invoked two cable news personalities on opposite ends of the political spectrum. She said that some Missourians watch Sean Hannity every night “and think he’s a genius,” and that some watch Rachel Maddow and hold the same view of her.“And then there’s a whole bunch of Missourians who watch ‘Dancing With the Stars’ and don’t like any of us,” she said, “and it’s those voters who decide Missouri elections.”Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.Advertisement