http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/11/us/racial-tension-and-protests-on-campuses-across-the-country.html
Racial Tension and Protests on Campuses Across the Country - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
611
AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesInstances of racism and bigotry have ignited protests at colleges across the United States, and social media has amplified students’ messages far beyond campus. Here are some examples.The president of the University of Missouri system resigned Nov. 9 after weeks of protests over racial tensions that had nearly paralyzed the campus — including a threat by dozens of black football players to boycott games. The president, Timothy M. Wolfe, urged everyone involved to “use my resignation to heal and start talking again.” Later that day, the chancellor of the Columbia campus, R. Bowen Loftin, also resigned.Weeks of simmering racial tension boiled over this month in a debate over whether the administration was sensitive enough to concerns about Halloween costumes seen as culturally offensive. Many of the students who met with Yale’s president, Peter Salovey, said they did not believe the university was attuned to the needs of minority students. The campus has been engaged in a long-running debate over a residential college named in honor of John C. Calhoun, a 19th-century South Carolina politician, outspoken white supremacist and member of the Yale class of 1804.Students at the Sigma Phi Epsilon fraternity and Alpha Phi sorority at the University of California, Los Angeles, held a “Kanye Western” event in October in which students, some of them white, dressed as either Kanye West, in baggy clothes, or as Kardashians, in form-fitting outfits and padded behinds. Protesters on campus flooded university administration offices that week chanting “Black Bruins matter.” The university, in a statement to The Daily Bruin, cautioned students to think before acting in a way that could offend those of different races.At the University of Michigan, hundreds of students and faculty members gathered for a 12-hour “speak out” in February 2014 to address racial tensions that erupted after a fraternity, whose members were mostly Asian and white, planned a party inviting “rappers, twerkers, gangsters” and others “back to da hood again.”After two students were expelled in March for leading a racist song that caused outrage across the country, the fraternity involved said it would investigate questions of whether the chant was used by members at other universities.University officials suspended members of a fraternity in connection with a January 2014 party for Martin Luther King’s Birthday at which students wore loose basketball jerseys, flashed gang signs and drank from hollowed-out watermelons.Advertisement