https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/24/us/politics/biden-praise-republican-speaking-fee.html
Joe Biden Defends Praise for Embattled Republican During Midterms - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
817
AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexander BurnsJoseph R. Biden Jr. defended his decision to praise an embattled Republican lawmaker during a paid speech in Michigan last fall, telling a group of mayors on Thursday morning that it reflected his philosophy of how to “get things done.”The New York Times reported on Wednesday that Mr. Biden had earned $200,000 for an October speaking engagement in Benton Harbor, Mich., three weeks before the midterm elections. During that speech, Mr. Biden gave a glowing commendation to Representative Fred Upton, a powerful Republican who joined with Mr. Biden to increase funding for cancer research and, separately, helped forge legislation to gut the Affordable Care Act.In Washington Thursday, Mr. Biden offered a forceful defense of his supportive remarks about Mr. Upton, signaling that he has no intention of blunting his instinct toward bipartisanship and compromise in the event that he runs for president. The former vice president has told allies in recent weeks that he is leaning toward running against President Trump in 2020.“I read in The New York Times today that I — that one of my problems is if I ever run for president, I like Republicans,” Mr. Biden said, according to a video posted by the public-affairs network C-Span.He joked: “O.K., well, bless me father, for I have sinned.”“Fred Upton, I went out and spoke at an event and he was there and I praised him about the fight against cancer,” Mr. Biden continued, citing Mr. Upton’s role in passing the 21st Century Cures Act. “It mattered, saved people’s lives and he stepped up, he and three other Republicans stepped up and helped us pass it. So I acknowledged that and now I’m — I don’t know what I am.”Mr. Biden did not mention the speaking fee he received for his trip to Michigan, or address Mr. Upton’s role in the drive to repeal the Obama administration’s signature health care law, two dimensions of his Benton Harbor appearance that complicate Mr. Biden’s depiction of his remarks as a case study in old-school conciliation.In a statement published Wednesday, Mr. Upton described Mr. Biden’s praise for him as a surprise and an “immense honor.”Mr. Biden campaigned widely around the country during the midterm elections and made a particularly strong effort for Democrats in the Midwest, including elsewhere in Michigan.But in Mr. Upton’s district, Mr. Biden’s favorable comments were used in Republican advertising in the final weeks of his re-election campaign against Matt Longjohn, a Democrat who was a national Y.M.C.A. health official. Mr. Upton ultimately won re-election by four and a half percentage points, the narrowest margin of his career.The article describing Mr. Biden’s speech to the Economic Club stirred particularly strong criticism of the former vice president among liberal Democrats, who view him as an ideological centrist and distrust his philosophy of aisle-crossing political compromise.Advertisement