https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/28/dining/paul-liebrandt-is-leaving-corton.html
Paul Liebrandt Is Leaving  Corton - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2056
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeff GordinierOne of the most acclaimed restaurants in New York is losing its chef. Paul Liebrandt, who for five years has been the  fastidious auteur in the kitchen at Corton, in TriBeCa, has parted ways with the restaurant, a publicist for him said on Saturday.Mr. Liebrandt plans to shift his attention to the Elm, a restaurant he opened in the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn this summer, and to a high-end project in Manhattan that could come together next year.With Mr. Liebrandt’s cooking and the management of the veteran restaurateur Drew Nieporent, Corton received two stars from Michelin and three stars from Frank Bruni in a 2008 New York Times review. In 2011 the chef was the subject of a documentary called “A Matter of Taste.”But over the past year or so it became noticeably easy to land a table at the restaurant, even on a weekend evening, and friction at Corton between Mr. Liebrandt and Mr. Nieporent surfaced in a recent Times profile of the chef, who is known for being as headstrong as he is inspired. “My whole thing has always been about accessibility and making it easier on the guest,” Mr. Nieporent said at the time. “This has been a challenge. Because his food is anything but accessible. It takes submission.”Corton recently announced on its Web site that it would be closed in July for a summer break. In a brief phone conversation on Saturday, Mr. Nieporent said he was still weighing his options for the restaurant, which is in the space that once housed the legendary Montrachet.“We achieved a great deal,” said Mr. Nieporent, the businessman behind restaurants such as Nobu and Tribeca Grill. “At the end of the day, we just couldn’t make it work financially.”For a while, he said, he floated the notion that Mr. Liebrandt could buy Corton outright, following a model established in 2011 when the chef Daniel Humm and the manager Will Guidara fully took over Eleven Madison Park, ending their partnership with the restaurateur Danny Meyer.That idea never really gained traction at Corton. And once Mr. Liebrandt’s plans for the Elm began to emerge, Mr. Nieporent was not keen on having his chef’s artistry going head to head with itself. “Your partner cannot be your competitor,” he said.For now, the future of Corton remains undecided. “I’m not saying it’s going to continue on, or close,” Mr. Nieporent said. “At this moment I haven’t made that decision.” He did suggest that, in the wake of the recent Times profile of Mr. Liebrandt, he has heard from many chefs who have expressed a willingness to step in. “It’s less of me approaching people and it’s more people approaching me, and that’s gratifying in a large way,” Mr. Nieporent said. He added: “Keep your eyes open, because something exciting’s going to follow.”In a statement released by the publicist Jennifer Baum, Mr. Liebrandt said: “It has been a wonderful five years and I value the experience I had there and thank everyone who has worked so hard with me at Corton. I felt it was the right time to move on to new and different projects which, in addition to the Elm, are already in the planning stages, including a signature Paul Liebrandt restaurant.”Although the Elm has been advertised as an elegant but slightly more casual spin on Mr. Liebrandt’s culinary artistry, Ms. Baum said the forthcoming project, a collaboration with the same King & Grove hotel team that is behind the Elm, “will not be casual at all.”Advertisement