https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/01/opinion/peter-georgescu-capitalism.html
Opinion | A Capitalist Is Worried - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
91
AdvertisementSupported byAlso: Different views on the allegation against Joe Biden.By David LeonhardtOpinion ColumnistThis article is part of David Leonhardt’s newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it each weekday.I met Peter Georgescu more than 20 years ago. I was a young reporter for BusinessWeek magazine, and part of my beat was the advertising business. One of my editors suggested that I profile Georgescu, because the firm he ran — Young & Rubicam — was doing well and because he had an amazing life story.He certainly does. He spent more than seven years effectively as a child prisoner of the Soviet empire, in his native Romania. He then became an American cause célèbre, was released from Romania, reunited with his parents in New York and was ultimately photographed with President Dwight Eisenhower.Today, Peter is 80 years old, and he is profoundly worried about the state of his adopted country. “Capitalism is a brilliant factory for prosperity. Brilliant,” he told me recently. “And yet the version of capitalism we have created here works for only a minority of people.”[Listen to “The Argument” podcast every Thursday morning, with Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David Leonhardt.]My column this morning is about Peter, his fears and his proposed solution. I hope you’ll read it.If you’re interested in the broader topic of capitalism, my colleague Nick Kristof wrote this weekend about a small company that isn’t trying to minimize its workers’ pay.The Biden accusationJoe Biden’s penchant for touching people — rubbing their shoulders, nuzzling their hair and so on — was always going to present a problem for his presidential campaign.However he intends the behavior, it is at least a bit strange and no doubt has made some people feel uncomfortable. One of them came forward on Friday: Lucy Flores, a former candidate for lieutenant governor in Nevada, who said Biden planted an extended kiss on the back of her head. The internet is full of video montages of Biden engaging in such behavior.Will this have a major effect on Biden’s likely campaign? Should it? I don’t know, and I generally try to spend some time thinking about these issues of personal behavior before coming to a conclusion. To take another example, I still haven’t decided how to put Amy Klobuchar’s treatment of her staff in perspective. Here are a few pieces on Biden, with different perspectives, that may help you make up your mind:Biden’s conduct is in line with a mixed policy record on women’s issues, says New York magazine’s Rebecca Traister: “He has provided liberal cover to anti-feminist backlash, the kind of old-fashioned paternalism of powerful men who don’t take women’s claims to their reproductive, professional, or political autonomy particularly seriously, who walk through the world with a casual assurance that men’s access to and authority over women’s bodies is natural,” she writes.The Washington Examiner’s Philip Klein compares Biden’s situation to Al Franken’s, where visual evidence helped to back up allegations against Franken. “Given how much awkwardness we’ve seen publicly from Biden, it would be surprising if Flores were the only woman to come out and say he made her feel uncomfortable, and the ample visual evidence of him acting creepy will make it hard to dismiss any accusers,” he writes.Stephanie Carter, the wife of a former secretary of defense, whose 2015 photo with Biden has been cited as evidence of his inappropriate touching, disputed those characterizations of the image: “I absolutely support [Flores’s] right to speak her truth and she should be, like all women, believed. But her story is not mine. The Joe Biden in my picture is a close friend helping someone get through a big day, for which I will always be grateful.”“I think he can survive it. And this is why he survives it: comfort,” Cornell Belcher argued on NBC’s “Meet the Press.” “Democrats are very, very comfortable with Joe Biden.”If you are not a subscriber to this newsletter, you can subscribe here. You can also join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.David Leonhardt is a former Washington bureau chief for the Times, and was the founding editor of The Upshot and head of The 2020 Project, on the future of the Times newsroom. He won the 2011 Pulitzer Prize for commentary, for columns on the financial crisis.  @DLeonhardt • Facebook Advertisement