https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/14/nyregion/gisle-masson-la-grenouille-owner-dies-at-89.html
Gisèle Masson Dies at 89; Fed the Famous at La Grenouille - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2051
AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberGisèle Masson, the grande dame of La Grenouille, the classic French restaurant on the East Side of Manhattan that was a favorite of high-society types and celebrities of various stripes, of fashion moguls and publishing executives, died on Nov. 5 in Paris. She was 89.Her son Charles Masson Jr. confirmed her death, but did not specify a cause.Famed for its haute cuisine, elaborate floral arrangements, gently flattering lighting, tableside service and genteel ambience, La Grenouille is a survivor of an era when French cooking and elegant décor — exemplified by now-departed restaurants like Le Pavillon, La Côte Basque, La Caravelle, Le Cygne and Lutèce — dominated the elite stratum of New York dining establishments.Since opening its doors during a blizzard in December 1962, La Grenouille — the name (which is properly pronounced greh-NOO-ee) means “the frog” — has been among the most well-reviewed restaurants in the city. And though occasionally chided as being a dowager or a stodgy relic of a bygone age, it is considered among the nation’s finest.Mme. Masson was known to visit tables there, especially during dessert, contributing to what customers often described as La Grenouille’s atmosphere of comfort and welcome. She ran the business end of the restaurant, leaving the aesthetics to her husband, Charles Masson Sr., and, after his death in 1975, largely to her son Charles. In an interview on Wednesday, Charles described his mother as “the brains” of the place.She was born Gisèle Collas in Paris on Jan. 7, 1925. Her father, Jules, was a historian; her mother, the former Amélie Mercier, was a milliner. She left school during World War II and came to the United States in 1949, arriving in New York with $35. Shortly after her arrival, she encountered Charles Masson, whom she had known slightly in Paris, and soon married him.The son of a hotelier, Charles Masson Sr. had worked for Henri Soulé, a pioneer of French cuisine in America, at the restaurant in the French government’s pavilion at the 1939 World’s Fair in New York. He subsequently worked at Le Pavillon, where, at the time that he and Mme. Masson were married in 1949, he was the maître d’hotel.“They got married at City Hall between lunch and dinner,” Charles Jr. said.In the early 1950s the couple opened a restaurant, Les Pyrénées, in Queechy Lake, N.Y., along the Massachusetts border, a venture that exhausted them. “They looked back on it as romantic and foolish,” Charles Jr. said.Charles Sr. went to work as the dining room captain on trans-Atlantic ocean liners. Left at home for weeks at a time, Mme. Masson decided to set up a restaurant at 3 East 52nd Street, leasing space that a Scandinavian restaurant, Copenhagen, had vacated after a fire. She and her husband later bought the building.“It was never his ambition to open another restaurant,” Charles Jr. said. “My mother had more confidence in him than he had in himself.”As Charles Jr. recalled it, the restaurant got its name through his father’s friendship with the actor Fredric March. A ship on which Charles Sr. was working was docked on the Isle of Capri when he received word of his wife’s unexpected financial move. As it happened, Mr. March was also on board, and Charles Sr. expressed to him his shock at what his wife had done. When he said she had instructed him to choose a name for the restaurant, Mr. March replied, “Well, don’t you have a pet name for your wife?”“I do,” Charles Sr. replied. “I call her ‘ma petite grenouille.' ”In recent decades, a feud between Charles and his brother, Philippe, has marred the operation of La Grenouille. In a dispute over control, Charles, who has said that his mother favored Philippe, left the restaurant in 1993 and was replaced as general manager by his brother. He returned in 2000, but their quarrel resurfaced this year when Charles abruptly resigned again “because of disagreeable circumstances between us,” he said on Wednesday.He added that Philippe had been living with their mother for several years, in New York and then in France. Reached at the restaurant, Philippe Masson declined to answer questions.Charles Masson said: “My brother and I, we don’t really speak the same language. It has been a prolonged silence. Gradually I have been isolated. It has been a painful last few years.“This,” he added, referring to his mother’s death, “makes it more painful.”In addition to her sons, Mme. Masson is survived by a sister, Monique Corsini, and three grandchildren.Charles Jr. is now general manager of the restaurant and bar at the Baccarat Hotel and Residences on Fifth Avenue, which is scheduled to open in February. Asked in an email if the death of his mother meant that ownership of La Grenouille would now pass to him, to his brother or to both, he responded: “Madame Masson was the owner. Unfortunately, I am not in a position to state more than that.”A picture caption in some copies on Friday with an obituary about Gisèle Masson, a founder of the New York restaurant La Grenouille, misidentified the man shown with her and the chef Andre Joanlanne. He is Charles Masson Jr., her son — not Charles Masson Sr., her husband.Advertisement