https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/24/us/politics/in-the-demint-era-at-heritage-a-shift-from-policy-to-politics.html
In the DeMint Era at Heritage, a Shift From Policy to Politics - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2405
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jennifer Steinhauer and Jonathan WeismanWASHINGTON — Not long after Jim DeMint took over the Heritage Foundation last spring, his team summoned the staff for a meeting unlike any the decorous conservative policy organization had ever convened. Music blared in the auditorium. Policy analysts began with a few awkward jokes and then scampered about in a series of skits that laid out the foundation’s goals.Some of the veteran managers of the staid think tank stared on balefully. A new era had arrived.From its inception in 1973, the Heritage Foundation has provided the blueprint for the Republican Party’s ideas in Washington. In doing so, it has proved to be the most durable organization of its kind.But under Mr. DeMint, a South Carolinian who gave up his Senate seat last year to take the helm, Heritage has shifted. Long known as an incubator for policy ideas and the embodiment of the party establishment, it has become more of a political organization feeding off the rising populism of the Tea Party movement.“Politics follows the culture,” Mr. DeMint said in an interview. “The conservative movement has been derelict in not putting together an organized movement across this country.” In recent months, some of the group’s most prominent scholars have left. Research that seemed to undermine Heritage’s political goals has been squelched, former Heritage officials say. And more and more, the work of policy analysts is tailored for social media.Mr. DeMint, 62, drawing on his experience in advertising and marketing before he entered politics, has bolstered what he calls his “sales force,” young staff members working for the foundation’s political arm, Heritage Action for America, and the foundation’s media and Internet operations. Mr. DeMint’s main focus this year, he said, will be a media tour promoting his new book, “Falling in Love With America Again,” which comes out next month. The new approach, Mr. DeMint said, is to spread the ethos of the Heritage Foundation more broadly and among younger recruits. “Conservative ideas are invigorating,” he said. “We had allowed them to become too serious.”The election of President Obama was a catalyst for a more aggressive conservative movement that also drove the foundation to take on a more political bent. Heritage Action was born. New lobbying laws restricted the foundation’s ability as a charity to engage in politics, so board members in 2010 pushed to establish a sister organization under section 501(c)(4) of the tax code, which would allow for lobbying.Efforts by Heritage Action have included pressuring members of Congress to vote against nearly every piece of legislation intended to attract both moderate and conservative Republicans, scoring their votes and often crusading against noncompliant members. Heritage Action staff members began to accompany policy experts to Capitol Hill.“We need to educate the people who are making the sausage and those who are being force-fed it: the American people,” said Edwin J. Feulner, 72, a founder of the Heritage Foundation, whom Mr. DeMint replaced.Under Mr. DeMint, the research arm of Heritage has been all but consumed by Heritage Action, which, some former officials and members of Congress say, has weakened the Heritage Foundation’s influence on Capitol Hill, alienated all but the right fringe of the Republican Party and marginalized the serious research that had been a Heritage Foundation hallmark.“DeMint has not only politicized Heritage, he’s also trivialized it,” said Mickey Edwards, a founding trustee of the Heritage Foundation and a Republican former congressman.Further, its critics say, Heritage Action has undermined the goals of the Republican majority in the House, prompting some congressional Republicans to turn their backs on the group, refusing to meet with its members and shutting them out of hearings. However, the group maintains enough influence over the Republican vote count to force House Speaker John A. Boehner to rely on Democrats to pass major bills such as spending legislation and agriculture policy. That means making legislation more liberal.For instance, both the Heritage Foundation and Heritage Action opposed the recently enacted farm bill because it initially did not cut the food stamp program as drastically as it wanted. In the end, House leaders had to pare back even those cuts to attract Democrats. “Had a number of the forces out and around this town been more focused on trying to achieve doable reform, we might have gotten more,” said Representative Frank D. Lucas of Oklahoma, chairman of the House Agriculture Committee, which shepherded the farm bill.The group’s opposition to the Republican version of the bill, coming on the heels of the government shutdown that Heritage Action had fomented, enraged even some of the most conservative members of the House. Mr. DeMint acknowledged some sore feelings. “I ruffled some feathers, too, when I was in the Senate,” he said. “That’s a big part of what Action is supposed to do. It’s what we call tough love, I guess.”The Heritage Foundation was conceived as the brain trust of the Republican Party. Republican lawmakers used its work to write legislation; Mr. Feulner was fond of pointing to the Capitol dome and reminding his staff members of their central constituents: members of Congress.With the creation of Heritage Action, young conservatives adopted more of a fighting stance. The staff members often decided, with little consultation from Heritage Foundation scholars, which legislation to support or oppose, and then pressured members of Congress to take their side.Their positions were at times directly out of step with the foundation, as was the case in 2012 with a bill to reduce tariffs on some imports. Heritage Action insisted the legislation would open the floodgates of pet-project “earmarking,” even as a Heritage Foundation research analyst backed it for reducing taxes.Representative Dave Camp of Michigan, the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, was so incensed by the mixed message that he demanded a meeting with Mr. Feulner, who promised to call off Heritage Action but never did, Republican House aides said. Perhaps no event has been more indicative of the foundation’s new relations with Congress than the decision by House Republicans last summer to kick Heritage Foundation analysts out of the weekly meeting of their Republican Study Committee. Heritage officials had been the only outsiders allowed in the meeting. But as Heritage Action became more aggressive, study committee members demanded to know why the people criticizing them in their districts were listening in on their strategizing in Washington.Mr. DeMint attributed the ouster to questions over ethics rules on providing food to lawmakers. “I’m not saying there weren’t a few members angry with Heritage Action,” he said.Advocates of the changes say Mr. DeMint is bringing the institution into the 21st century. Their messaging and ideas on immigration, the role of government and the federal debt have been market-tested through surveys and focus groups, and amplified through social media.In recent months, the exodus of top experts and administrators has accelerated. Among those to leave are the economists J. D. Foster and William Beach; Matthew Spalding, the foundation’s director of American studies; Michael Franc, its vice president for government relations; and Alison Acosta Fraser, its director of government finance programs.Mr. DeMint said that turnover was no greater than in the past. The Heritage Foundation has recently brought on the economist Stephen Moore from The Wall Street Journal’s editorial page and Katrina Trinko from National Review, two hires known more for their advocacy journalism than their scholarship.The scholarship at Heritage, Mr. DeMint said, remains its central feature. “I had no intention to get more political,” he said. “The whole conservative movement counts on Heritage for its intellectual integrity.”Advertisement