https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/18/us/when-dungeons-dragons-set-off-a-moral-panic.html
When Dungeons & Dragons Set Off a ‘Moral Panic’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2490
AdvertisementSupported byRetro ReportBy Clyde HabermanGoing back at least to the 1690s, when the elders of colonial Salem, Mass., executed 20 women and men for supposedly practicing witchcraft, there have been Americans who find the devil’s hand in all manner of human activity.Satanic messages have been ascribed to the corporate symbols of major companies like Starbucks and Procter & Gamble. Some religious fundamentalists are certain that 666, the number of the beast in the Book of Revelation, lurks in swirls that are central to the logos of the Olympic Games, Google Chrome and the Walt Disney Company. The Harry Potter series, with its incantations and wizardry, has also come under fire (and brimstone) for ostensibly promoting occultism.Then there is Dungeons & Dragons, introduced in 1974 as the first role-playing game made commercially available. D&D players, working collaboratively, can let their minds roam free through stories about brave warriors locked in combat with trolls, orcs, dragons and other evildoers. The game’s millions of players include prominent writers like Junot Díaz and Cory Doctorow, who have described it as their apprenticeship to storytelling, a gateway to the essence of fantasy and narrative.But not everyone has smiled benignly upon D&D. That is reflected in this offering from Retro Report, a series of video documentaries examining major news stories of the past and their reverberations.The 1980s were prime years for accusations that the game fostered demon worship and a belief in witchcraft and magic. Some religious figures cast it as corrupting enough to steer impressionable young players toward suicide and murder. As Retro Report recalls, fears began to be stirred in 1979 with the disappearance of James Dallas Egbert III, a gifted 16-year-old student at Michigan State University and a devoted D&D player. The game warped his thinking and drove him to behave erratically — or so some insisted. In reality, the boy was already troubled. After a month’s absence, he was found. But in 1980 he ended up taking his own life.A nationwide focus on his plight propelled interest in D&D. Sales soared, with the numbers of players leaping from the thousands into the millions. Condemnation rose as well, usually after bad things happened to D&D gamers. When Irving Lee Pulling II, a high school student in Virginia, killed himself in 1982, his mother, Patricia A. Pulling, blamed the game and formed a group called Bothered About Dungeons and Dragons. D&D was also attacked after a few murders, like the 1984 strangulation of a Missouri teenager, Mary C. Towey, by two young men, Ronald G. Adcox and Darren Lee Molitor.A “moral panic,” as cultural critics labeled it, set in. It was not unlike 1950s fears over gory comic books and 1980s worries over sex-laced rock music. But researchers, including those with the Centers for Disease Control, established no causal link between the game and violence. Much of the finger-pointing seemed rooted in a classic fallacy in logic: Mr. Adcox and Mr. Molitor played D&D. Mr. Adcox and Mr. Molitor became killers. People who play D&D become killers.Agitation over the game has subsided. So has general interest. D&D is classically low-tech, played with pens, paper, dice and figurines. Its influence, however, abides, notably among creative types who acknowledge that they qualified as full-blown nerds in their teens.The game “redirected teenage miseries and energies that might have been put to more destructive uses,” Jon Michaud wrote in The New Yorker two years ago. Mr. Díaz told Retro Report that he “learned an enormous amount about what it meant to be courageous and what it meant to be compassionate, and the kind of moral — hard, moral — choices that one needs to make in real life.”“It’s just nice,” he said, “to spend a lot of time thinking, imagining in a group, collaborating.”Today, parental anxieties have turned to videos, notably those dripping with gore. Can it be mere coincidence, some ask, that the mass killers in Colorado at Columbine High School and the Aurora movie theater, and at the grade school in Newtown, Conn., all played violent electronic games?(It may be worth noting that video games of any kind held scant appeal for Gary Gygax, who created D&D with Dave Arneson. Mr. Gygax, who died in 2008, a year before Mr. Arneson, felt that computer graphics dulled the imagination. Electronic versions of D&D that came along were no exception. “There is no intimacy; it’s not live,” he said in a 2006 interview. “It’s being translated through a computer, and your imagination is not there the same way it is when you’re actually together with a group of people. It reminds me of one time where I saw some children talking about whether they liked radio or television, and I asked one little boy why he preferred radio, and he said, ‘Because the pictures are so much better.’ ”)Judging the consequences of mayhem-filled videos has proved elusive. Although researchers detect short-term increases in aggressive behavior by some habitual gamers, they say the long-range impact is harder to discern. Many factors, social scientists say, go into the making of a mass murderer, perhaps including media violence but almost certainly not limited to it.Complicating matters is this: The explosion of video games over the last few decades has been accompanied not by an increase in youth violence but, rather, by a sharp decline. Justice Department statistics show that in 1994 there were 497 arrests for violent crimes for every 100,000 Americans ages 10 to 17. Since then, the arrest rate has fallen almost without interruption year by year. In 2014, it stood at 158, not even one-third what it was 20 years earlier.Determining cause and effect is often not simple, and that has been the case throughout the history of games.A century ago, H. G. Wells, the English titan of science fiction, invented a tabletop game called Little Wars with a friend, Jerome K. Jerome. Though a pacifist, Wells was intrigued by war games. He wrote a handbook for his creation, filled with clear rules of combat for opposing infantry, cavalry and artillery. That was in 1913. A year later, World War I broke out.You see the connection, don’t you?The videos with this article are part of a documentary series presented by The New York Times. The video project was started with a grant from Christopher Buck. Retro Report has a staff of 13 journalists and 10 contributors led by Kyra Darnton. It is a nonprofit video news organization that aims to provide a thoughtful counterweight to today’s 24/7 news cycle. Previous episodes are at nytimes.com/retroreport. To suggest ideas for future reports, email retroreport@nytimes.com.Advertisement