https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/28/us/border-checkpoints-mexico.html
This Is America. Do You Belong Here? Navigating the Checkpoints of the Southwest Border - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2561
AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesWelcome to Crossing the Border, a limited-run weekly newsletter from The New York Times. Like what you see? Send this to a friend. If someone forwarded it to you, sign up here to have the next issue delivered to your inbox.By Manny Fernandez in McAllen, Tex.Here in Texas, America has two southern borders. I live 10 miles from one, 60 miles from the other.The first border is the one you know about: the tall steel barrier you see on the news, the physical and symbolic line that is patrolled, topped with razor-wire and debated.The second is well north of that, and it has been quietly setting Southwestern cities apart from the rest of America for years. This other “border” is the line of federal traffic checkpoints that operate up to 100 miles north of the existing fence. There are more than 30 permanent Border Patrol checkpoints across Arizona, California, Texas and New Mexico.More than the fence line, the checkpoint line is in many ways the true border wall — more undocumented immigrants die trying to circumvent the checkpoints than they do trying to get around the fence, and many fear the checkpoints more than they fear the fence. Every day, hundreds of thousands of people who pull up to these checkpoints have to do something other Americans in other cities don’t have to do on the highway: Answer a uniformed officer’s question about whether they are a United States citizen.These checkpoints were suddenly in the news this week, after the Border Patrol took the rare step of temporarily closing some of them in the El Paso region and in New Mexico. Border Patrol officials said they did it in response to the influx of Central American families seeking asylum. Agents working those checkpoints are being diverted elsewhere to help process the migrants that officials said are overwhelming their resources along the border.“Two weeks ago, I briefed the media and testified in Congress that our immigration system was at the breaking point,” the commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, Kevin K. McAleenan, told reporters in El Paso on Wednesday. “That breaking point has arrived this week at our border.” There were a total of 13,400 migrants in custody along the border Wednesday morning, he said. “A high number for us is 4,000. A crisis level is 6,000. Thirteen thousand is unprecedented.”The closures have brought the checkpoints back into the national spotlight and have raised a host of questions. The Border Patrol has pumped a considerable amount of time, taxpayer money and personnel into these inland checkpoints, designed to intercept any drugs or unauthorized migrants that might have made it through the main ports of entry.When I visited one of the busiest checkpoints on the border in 2015 — located in the middle of South Texas ranchlands near the town of Falfurrias on Highway 281 — a Border Patrol official told me: “Without the checkpoints, then you have narcotics and people just coming straight up the highways.”One must presume those narcotics and people are coming straight up the highways now in the parts of Texas and New Mexico where the checkpoints are now closed — for all the talk of toughened border security.Last month, I moved temporarily from Houston to the South Texas city of McAllen to help expand The New York Times’s coverage of the border. I can’t drive north back to Houston without passing a checkpoint, and I can’t pass a checkpoint until I roll down my window and answer a Border Patrol agent’s question: “Are you a U.S. citizen?”Sometimes the agents ask me where I’m headed, and on at least one occasion they asked me to pop the trunk. Once, an agent joked about the Barbie and “Trolls” stickers my 6-year-old daughter had stuck on a back window. Another time, one of the Border Patrol dogs that sniff the vehicles responded to something in my trunk, and I had to pull over for a secondary inspection (which proved uneventful).In a nation where police stop-and-frisk tactics are the subject of much debate, Americans who live on the border have normalized government intrusion.“It’s destabilizing to the people who live in these regions, in subtle ways, nuanced ways,” said Francisco Cantú, a former Border Patrol agent who is the author of “The Line Becomes a River,” a memoir. “I think it’s part of creating the ‘state of exception,’ creating this idea that the borderland is somehow ‘other’ — other than the regular full United States.”The interactions at the checkpoints don’t always go as smoothly as mine have. Numerous motorists and activists who have refused to answer the citizenship question have posted videos of the encounters on YouTube. One video shows a California teacher at a New Mexico checkpoint as she questioned an agent’s authority to stop her. Agents in those situations usually make reference to U.S. v. Martinez-Fuerte, the 1976 Supreme Court ruling that established that vehicle stops at the checkpoints were consistent with the Fourth Amendment’s restrictions on unreasonable search and seizure.One thing I often wonder: I was born in Fresno, Calif., but would I get questioned as often at the checkpoints if I weren’t Mexican-American? Several white friends and colleagues have told me that agents have waved them through without questioning their citizenship status. That doesn’t happen to me. I’ve passed through several Border Patrol checkpoints in Texas dozens of times. I get asked whether I’m an American citizen, every single time.Manny is one of a team of New York Times journalists currently reporting from the border. Each week they’re sharing a slice of their reporting about the border and the people who spend time on both sides of it.Do you have questions about life on the border? Or feedback about this newsletter? Email us at: crossingtheborder@nytimes.com.“This is me, this is who I really am. When I get out of here, I transform.”— Jess Enriquez TaylorMs. Taylor, a transgender woman who is Mexican and grew up in the United States, was the subject of a recent story by Jose A. Del Real. In Mexico, her family expects her to dress as a man, but in the United States, she has the freedom to live and dress as a woman. Rather than go back to Mexico regularly, she chooses to be homeless in America. Read Jose’s full story about Ms. Taylor here.The president wants a wall. Many in Congress do not.The fight over how much funding should go to expanding the nation’s border barriers, if any, led to the longest shutdown in United States history. And when the government finally reopened in January, the fate of the president’s wall seemed as confusing as ever.Here’s a look at what has happened since then and what’s likely to happen next:• On Tuesday, the House of Representatives came up short in an attempt to override the president’s veto of an earlier House vote rebuking him for declaring a national emergency at the southern border. That allowed the president’s declaration of a national emergency at the southern border to stand. Read the full story here.• Here’s how every member of the House voted.• The debate over the emergency declaration now turns to the courts, where a coalition of more than a dozen states filed lawsuits last month challenging its legal merits.• This week, the acting defense secretary authorized the transfer of up to $1 billion toward the construction of 57 miles of border wall and other related projects. That money was separate from the emergency declaration, and military leaders around the country are mindful that local construction projects — fire station repairs, new schools and training complexes — may soon see their funding cut or delayed to help pay for the wall. Read more about those projects here.Read earlier installments of Crossing the Border here. Sign up here to have the next issue delivered to your inbox.Advertisement