https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/26/books/review/wade-in-the-water-tracy-k-smith.html
In Her New Work, a Public Poet Balances the Personal and Political - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2187
AdvertisementSupported byPoetryWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Charles SimicWADE IN THE WATER Poems By Tracy K. Smith 83 pp. Graywolf Press. $24.Tracy K. Smith’s previous collection of poems, “Life on Mars,” was awarded the Pulitzer Prize in 2012. With an ambition and range unequaled among her contemporaries, that book more than realized the promise of two earlier, somewhat more uneven volumes, “The Body’s Question” (2003) and “Duende” (2007), both of which also contained some stunningly beautiful poems. There has been quite a bit of good poetry written over the last 20 years in this country, and Smith — who since June 2017 has also served as the United States poet laureate — has produced among the most original of it.Expectations are high, in other words, for her new collection, “Wade in the Water.”Smith was born in Falmouth, Mass., and grew up in Fairfield, Calif., a small city midway between San Francisco and Sacramento. She was the youngest of five children. Her father grew up in Alabama and escaped the segregated South by enlisting in the Air Force. Her mother was a seriously religious person who went to church regularly and read the Bible every day. After Smith’s father retired from the military, he went to work as an optical engineer on the Hubble Space Telescope for NASA, which after its launch in 1990 helped scientists pin down the age of the universe and discover the so-called dark energy that counters gravity and keeps galaxies from colliding.Reading the poems in “Life on Mars” — with titles like “The Universe Is a House Party,” “Everything That Ever Was,” “My God, It’s Full of Stars,” “The Universe as Primal Scream” and so on — one can’t help being reminded of the father who spent years looking at the stars; in that light, his daughter’s book is both an extended conversation with him and an elegy. “Awe” was Emily Dickinson’s favorite word. She fretted about being a speck on a ball floating in darkness as much as the Smith of “Life on Mars” does. They both savor the thrill and terror of thinking about this mystery we are all in some way a part of, this mystery we call by different names without ever reducing the mystery, because it’s bigger than language and has no need of our words. This is how Smith sees it, in a poem from “Life on Mars” called “It & Co.”:We are a part of It. Not guests. Is It us, or what contains us? How can It be anything but an idea, Something teetering on the spine Of the number i? It is elegant But coy. It avoids the blunt ends Of our fingers as we point. We Have gone looking for It everywhere: In Bibles and bandwidth, blooming Like a wound from the ocean floor. Still, It resists the matter of false vs. real. Unconvinced by our zeal, It is un- Appeasable. It is like some novels: Vast and unreadable.In her very good new book, Smith’s concerns are more earthbound. Numerous poems in the collection are based on the letters and statements of African-Americans who served as soldiers in the Civil War and their wives, widows, parents and children, as well as correspondence between members of a white family regarding the sale of their various slaves. Smith shortens the letters, preserves the original spelling and punctuation, then titles and resets them so they look like poems. Here is one called “I Will Tell You the Truth About This, I Will Tell You All About It”:Carlisles, Pa. Nov 21 1864Mr abarham lincon I wont to knw sir if you please whether I can have my son relest from the arme he is all the subport I have now his father is Dead and his brother that wase all the help I had he has bean wonded twise he has not had nothing to send  me yet now I am old and my head is blossaming for the grave and if you do I hope the lord will bless you and me tha say that you will simpethise withe the poor he be long to the eight rigmat colard troops he is a sarjent mart welcom is his nameWhat I have always liked about Smith’s poetry is her interest in other people’s lives. The lone self has been the sacred cow of lyric poetry since the ancient Greeks, and there’s no way to sever that link permanently, but a vacation now and then from self-absorption to look around and see what the rest of the human race has been up to can do wonders to one’s poetry. Of course, mostly they’ve been up to no good — “The worst in us having taken over / And broken the rest utterly down,” as Smith says here in a poem called “An Old Story.”Smith once told an interviewer that when she had finished writing her first book, she felt she had gotten off her chest all she had to say and was tired of herself. “I’m going to let go of the first person,” she told herself. Of course, she didn’t. She turned to photography for about a year during an extended writer’s block, and when she did get back into writing, everything felt different. She realized that vivid imagery could go far toward condensing a poem’s narrative and conveying feelings. In her last two books we see the results of that lesson. The poems in “Wade in the Water” are full of memorable images nimbly put together by Smith’s exquisite sense of timing and her feel for the kind of language appropriate to the poem.The poems here about the country’s shameful history of racism and injustice, and the ones about the treatment of recent immigrants and refugees, will probably attract most of the attention — and they ought to. It’s rare for a sitting poet laureate to release a collection of new work during her term, and here Smith is forcefully addressing some of the nation’s enduring wounds.But “Wade in the Water” is not only a political book. It asks how an artist might navigate the political and the personal, and the collection’s real strength lies in its many marvelous poems that are more private: “The Angels,” for instance, about seeing a couple of them in her hotel room. Or the poem about God taking a walk around his creation. Or the ones about children, or the one about a slow man jogging, or the one about joining some believers as they wade into water. Or the gorgeous poem “Ash,” which is as scary and wise as an old nursery rhyme:Strange house we must keep and fill. House that eats and pleads and kills. House on legs. House on fire. House  infested With desire. Haunted house. Lonely  house. House of trick and suck and shrug. Give-it-to-me house. I-need-you-baby  house. House whose rooms are pooled with  blood. House with hands. House of guilt. House That other houses built. House of lies And pride and bone. House afraid to be  alone. House like an engine that churns and  stalls. House with skin and hair for walls. House the seasons singe and douse. House that believes it is not a house.In her memoir, “Ordinary Light,” Smith remembers a fifth-grade textbook with an Emily Dickinson poem, “I’m Nobody! Who Are You?” that she memorized. “It almost felt like the speaker and I were in collusion with one another,” she told The Iowa Review in a 2016 interview, “like there was this amazing space the speaker had invited me into.” She said she liked the sense of private mischief that poetry seemed to be able to extend. Those who know Smith’s poems love that about them, too.Charles Simic has won a Pulitzer Prize and a MacArthur grant for his poetry, among other honors. His most recent collection, “The Lunatic,” was published in 2015.Advertisement