https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/17/magazine/donald-trump-american-preacher.html
Donald Trump, American Preacher - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
102
FeatureBuilding a congregation for his prosperity gospel, one chaotic rally at a time.Trump speaking at a rally in Fountain Hills, Ariz., on March 19.CreditCreditDevin Yalkin for The New York TimesSupported byBy Jeff Sharlet‘It’s coming,” said the woman beside me, her face flushed beneath her flowing white hair. The long rectangle of the open hangar doors seemed to thrum, space waiting to be filled. And then, slowly, unstoppably, the plane nosed into view — a giant T, a giant R, a U and an M and a P, the plane swelling from its tip to its girth to its wings, filling completely the field of our vision.We had been waiting five hours by then, standing together on the concrete floor at the regional airport in Youngstown, Ohio, cycling over and over through the Donald Trump rally playlist, swaying together to “Tiny Dancer,” hopping to “Uptown Girl.” We hadn’t really known what to do with Puccini, but we sensed that it was grand — “This is special!” said an older woman behind me. Such was the mood, the deep pleasure of waiting derived not just from the speech to come but from a building sensation of togetherness, rolling vibrations of solidarity and giddiness and anticipation. Much has been made of the anger at Trump rallies. But when I stood among Trump’s crowds, what I felt most, flowing around me, was something like happiness. A sense of freedom. Permission.“First protester,” the white-haired woman’s husband declared, soon after we were packed in next to one another close to the podium. “I’ve got dibs.” She wore a pink shirt and a heart-shaped sapphire ring; the rest of her jewelry was turquoise and swirling green malachite. For a beat she gave her husband a look, the serious kind — then it cracked, and she beamed with the sweet comic timing of a couple long in love. “I’m gonna beat the [expletive] out of him,” he promised with a sly smile, “and get on CNN.”It was the joy of punching, real or imagined. “He stands up there and says what we all think,” the husband said. “We all want to punch somebody in the face, and he says it for us.” We envisioned it: knuckle, soft cheek. “You know you do,” he said. His wife patted my arm and smiled. “We all do,” she said. Then she tugged my sleeve. “Hillary,” she whispered in my ear, as if we had been talking about her. “Don’t you think she looks like she’s been rode hard and put up wet?”After a warm-up sermon from a preacher — “He is worthy! He is worthy!” he shouted, meaning both Trump and God — the playlist returned to the Stones, midsong, “Let’s Spend the Night Together.” Nobody minded the contradiction, sex and the sacred, because it wasn’t a contradiction; it was like the completion of a thought they had all been thinking but hadn’t known how to say out loud: greatness, the end of shame.At last, it came: Trump’s 757, heavy with gold. A group of women who had been sucking lollipops for the duration to keep their mouths wet — nobody had water — screamed: “Oh, my God! Oh, my God!” The heavy guy next to me said: “That is a big plane. I gotta admit, that is one big plane.”It is. Liberals giggle, but believers want to feel it all, not just the manufactured hope of a political rally but also the lust, the envy, the anger of our more honest selves, transformed by a mighty plane and the man inside — “He owns that,” moaned a girl behind me — into something greater.The Trump stairs rolled slowly toward the plane. And then we stared, our eyes bound to the diagonal silver bar of the plane’s door. We did not will it to turn. We waited, as if it were a minute hand suspended.When I ask Trump supporters what they love most about his rallies, they’re at a loss; all of it, they say, “just, just” — the way it makes them feel. How much it makes them feel. American politics tends to produce a limited emotional range, mostly positive, peppered with indignation. But Trump scrawls across the spectrum: not just anger but rage; love and, yes, hate; fear, a political commonplace, and also vengeance. It doesn’t feel political. Politicians have long borrowed from religion the passion and the righteousness, but no other major modern figure has channeled the tension that makes Scripture endure, the desire, the wanting that gives rise to the closest analogue to Trumpism: the prosperity gospel, the American religion of winning.Trump is impious, but he doesn’t reject faith. Instead, he returns it to the roots of Christian business conservatism, which is where he has been all along: Norman Vincent Peale’s 1952 best seller, “The Power of Positive Thinking.” Since Trump announced his candidacy, he has been talking about Peale, “my minister for years” (Peale died in 1993), but long before that — before he began declaring “nothing beats the Bible, not even ‘The Art of the Deal’ ” — the book that beat them all for Trump was Peale’s. In Iowa, Trump held up the Bible his mother gave him, but “Positive Thinking” Trump inherited from his developer father, Fred. Peale, Trump recently told a reporter, “thought I was his greatest student of all time.”“Positive Thinking” isn’t about serving God; it’s about “applied Christianity,” using God to achieve “a perfected and amazing method of successful living.” The method is like a closed loop, a winners’ circle of the soul. “The man who assumes success tends already to have success,” Peale writes, a tautological spiritual­ity as instantly recognizable in Trumpism as the drumbeat of his words: “success,” “amazing.” Peale’s message resonated most with the upper middle class — those, like Trump himself, who saw themselves as winners. The prosperity gospel recasts the same promise to those, like Trump’s followers, who feel lost.On the surface, the prosperity gospel is a simple transaction. The preacher is blessed, and you can be, too. All you have to do is invest. How? The usual way: You give him your money. Only, your money is just a metaphor. The good news is that faith will be repaid in kind. The deal — belief in return for relief, belief as a form of relief — is as old as religion, too fundamental to human consciousness to dismiss simply as a con. Pray for rain, sacrifice to the gods, keep kosher — you needn’t believe to recognize the power of trading devotion for the hope of well-being.10 PhotosView Slide Show ›What the prosperity gospel did was regulate the exchange. Kenneth Hagin, one of its modern founders, called it “the law of faith,” as real as the laws of physics. This wasn’t the Protestant work ethic. It wasn’t about “works” at all. Rather, it proposed supernatural intervention as a force you could direct through faith, as revealed through tithing and by putting the wealth that resulted on display. For the prosperity pioneer Oral Roberts, that included one of the largest bronze sculptures in the world, the 60-foot-tall praying hands at the entrance to the university that bears his name. For the perfectly named Creflo Dollar, one of today’s most popular prosperity preachers, it is the $65 million Gulf­stream G650, for which his ministry asked its followers — in a request later withdrawn — to make donations and “love offerings.”The ethos of the prosperity gospel is the key to Trump’s power to persuade people that his victories can be theirs — that the greatness of Trump is the means of making America great again. All that is ugly within it, the violence and the hate, is part of an expression of the sense of lack Trumpism both feeds and assuages. It is sorrow, a mourning of the chance that never was or won’t be. The left responds with redemption, the promise of justice; Trump sells revenge, “hitting back 10 times as hard.” But that’s just the drama, the conflict before the resolution, the sales pitch for which Trumpism is the solution: greatness, the truths all prosperity-gospel preachers embody for those who believe.Trump knows his followers want what he has, and that what Trump has, that for which the plane and the gold and all the “green,” too, are merely symbols, is freedom from want. Trump does not want; Trump is. “Is Trump strong?” Trump asks rhetorically. Those constrained by ordinary manners hear in the question evidence of insecurity. His admirers hear rejoicing. Why not take pleasure in power? It feels good to be strong. It is, for the believers, those whom Trump calls “my people,” a blessing.After the Youngstown rally, I drove to the only bar I could find still serving food and found myself sitting across from a group of three supporters. Mike was a union electrician, Shawn a dispatcher and Jackie a nurse. “Definitely a racist,” Shawn said of Trump. That did not appeal. But who would receive his vote? “Definitely Trump.” Mike was a probably; Jackie wouldn’t say, but she seemed to be sliding toward Trump. Only the bartender, Shane, was holding firm for the Democratic Party. He couldn’t believe his friends. “Trump’s not just a racist, he’s a [expletive] psychotic racist!”“So are half the people who walk into this [expletive] bar!” Shawn shouted back. He did not want to be racist. He did not want Trump to be racist. What he wanted, he said, was a better job, the kind of job Youngstown used to be known for.That was what Mike wanted too. We drank another round of fireballs. Mike’s probably-Trump began inching toward certainty. Another round. Then he suddenly roused himself, rising up from the bar. “I don’t care if you’re racist!” he shouted at a room by then nearly empty but for us. “If you’ll just bring back one [expletive] steel mill!”Shawn nodded, seriously. We drank to the dream, the steel mill they knew was not coming. It felt good, at least, to believe.The racism of Trump’s rhetoric is one of its most powerful currents, but it is only a means to an end, which is the exhilaration of winning. So, too, the violence of Trump’s words. It’s not at odds with his secular religiosity; it’s what makes his fantastical wealth imaginable, with Trump as a medium between the emotions we all struggle to control and the power to act on them. One supporter, a designer of women’s bicycling fashions, told me that when Trump says, “I’d like to punch that guy in the face,” or “Boom, boom, boom,” as he jabs his fist to demonstrate how he would handle a protester, it’s the “human moment” of his rallies. She meant the moment when Trump, who is by his wealth freed from our concerns, nonetheless feels what his followers feel, says what they wish they could say.The mainstays of his rallies are parables, in which he channels such sentiments into full-fledged, multivoiced dramatic scenes. Trump plays every role. There are three scenes in current rotation; if Trump worked off a set list, they might be labeled “The Call,” “The Snake” and “The Bullet.” In “The Call,” he plays President Trump, bringing American companies home through sheer force of will over the phone — or else. This is his parable of strength. In “The Snake,” he reads the lyrics to an old Al Wilson song by the same name, a parable of danger. “Think of it,” he says sometimes, “when we think of people coming into our country, who we don’t know who they are.” He draws out that last word, a long, almost whimsical “arrreee... .” Then, through four stanzas, he toggles between the personae of a wounded snake and a “tender woman” who cradles it to her bosom — only to be bitten. Trump-as-the-serpent hisses, “ ‘Oh shut up, silly woman!’ said the reptile with a grin — ‘You knew damn well I was a snake before you took me in!’ ”Camp comes easily to Trump, and he has an unusual gift for making it earnest. Reagan had it, too, but as the better actor he more inhabited his role without visible contradiction. Reagan’s favorite movie was “High Noon,” a story of an ordinary man who rises to greatness in response to circumstance. Trump’s favorites include “Citizen Kane” and “The Godfather,” stories of titanic ego at which the rest of us can marvel but never truly grasp. Given our limits, we tend to endow those born to a scale beyond our imagination with elements of grandeur or the overblown. Trump’s genius has been to recognize that he can capitalize on both, the power and the comedy. As with the great revivalists of the early 20th century — Billy Sunday with his baseball-themed passion plays, Aimee Semple McPherson making her entrance aboard the ship-shaped automobile of her “Salvation Navy” — camp may undermine Trump’s gravitas, but it amplifies his gravitational field. Gravitas is somber; somber is dull; and dull, to Trump, is impotent. Gravity is a force, and Trump makes his own. The speaking style Trump’s critics call crude — the smirk, smile, snarl and shrug; the digressions; all that is “very, very, very big,” “amazing” or “huge” — represents to his followers not vanity but the public intimacy of a man utterly himself. He does not try to claim, “I’m like you.” His promise is that he’s better than you. Not a servant; a leader. The one who acts.The darkest set piece in Trump’s current lineup, a parable of strength and danger combined, is the monologue I call “The Bullet.” You can see Trump perform it in the video of the rally he held in Dayton, Ohio, in March, the day after protesters shut down his rally in Chicago. He holds up a fist to show its size, a move played for laughs and power: He’s telling us, again, about the size of his genitals. He gets away with it because he’s joking. “But just to finish on torture,” he continues, although he hasn’t yet begun. “I started by saying they’re chopping off heads. Because you have to do a little bit of warm-up.” So he talks some more about terrorists “chopping off heads,” how hard it is to win when you have “rules.”“Can you imagine what these people say about the United States? How weak we are?”We’re warmed up now.“There’s a story I tell,” he says. “This is when we were strong.” The crowd cheers. Many have heard it before. He asks if they want to hear it again. “Should I tell it?” He asks three times.It begins with a horse, and on the horse there’s a general. The year is 1919; the place is the Philippines; the general is John J. Pershing, known as Black Jack. Trump does not name the war. It’s not the point. “Tremendous terror problem,” that’s what you need to know, and that the terrorists are Muslims. The point is Pershing’s solution:They catch 50 terrorists. ... Today we read ’em their rights, take care of ’em, ba ba [the audience boos], we feed them the best food, make sure they have television, we give ’em areas to pray, it’s a wonderful thing. We’re wonderful people. We’re wonderful, wonderful, stupid, stupid people [laughter]. So General Pershing, tough, tough guy ... 50 terrorists ... what happens is he lines ’em up to be shot. [A man shouts, “Yeah!”] Lines people up to be shot. ... And as you know, swine, pig, all of that is a big problem for them. Big problem. He took two pigs, they chopped them open. [Trump chops his hand.] Took the bullets that were going to go and shoot these men. [Holds up an imaginary bullet pinched between thumb and finger.] Took the bullets. The 50 bullets. Dropped them in the pigs, swished them around [swishes] so there’s blood all over those bullets. [Cheering.] Had his men, instructed his men [voice rising] to put the bullets into the rifles [thumps lectern]. They put the bullets into the rifles and they shot [he shouts the word; another man shouts, “Yeah!”] 49 men.He tells it again, puts the imaginary bullets into an imaginary rifle and shoots his imagined 49 Muslims. “Boom.”He leans forward, squints and runs his words together: “a-pig-infested-bullet-in-each-one.”A woman shouts, “Yeah!”Then, Trump says, they dumped the bodies into a mass grave — he waves his hand across the podium, sweeping the corpses in — and threw the gutted pigs on top of them. They took the final bullet — he holds it up again — and they gave it to the last man. “And they said, ‘Here, take this bullet’ ” — he mimes handing it over — “ ‘go back to your people’ ” — he jabs a finger at the last man’s “people,” and yet another man shouts, “Yeah!” — “ ‘and explain what we just did!’ ”Trump pauses. The crowd cheers. “This is history, folks.” (It’s not, but to Trump that doesn’t matter.) He’s not going to say whether it was “good” or “bad.” We can choose to win, or we can choose to lose. For Trump, this is not a choice.“Look, Dad,” said a beefy boy, damp with sweat beneath his tousled chestnut curls, “Snipers!” He pointed at two buildings bordering the park. Sure enough, there were men on the rooftops, surveying the thousands of Arizonans who had poured themselves into the vivid green bowl of Fountain Park in Fountain Hills. We were waiting for Trump. It was supposed to hit 91 degrees. There was a lemonade stand back by the metal detectors, but the crowd was too dense to move. There was nothing to do but sweat and stand. And listen. “Tiny Dancer.” “Uptown Girl.” Puccini.The father shaded his eyes. So did I, and so did the tall man next to me. He worked in the desert that recommenced at the town line, and maybe it had dried him out, because he had just so many words. “Secret Service,” he murmured.I disagreed. “Look at the tan uniforms,” I said. “I think those are Joe’s men.”“Joe,” in Fountain Hills, is Sheriff Joe Arpaio, nationally known for the boiling-hot tent-city jail he jokes about as a “concentration camp,” his theory of sexual humiliation as a form of rehabilitation and his “saturation patrols” in Latino neighborhoods in search of “illegals,” a practice that led to a 2013 federal court ruling against him for racial profiling and unlawful detention. Trump is particularly proud of his endorsement.The tall man considered. Yep. “Joe’s.”“Awesome,” the boy said. His dad smiled.Rumor held that you could see Arpaio’s house from where we stood. Rumor held that Arpaio had cleared bunks in his tent city for any protesters. Rumor held, one woman said, that Arpaio kept Fountain Hills “clean.” What did this mean? “It’s landlocked,” the tall man volunteered. In Arizona, that seemed as if it would be a given, but what he meant, he said, was that Fountain Hills — incorporated only in 1989 — was surrounded by Indian reservations.Only he didn’t say “Indian”; he mouthed the word. “They don’t like white people,” the woman said. “They keep to themselves.” She twirled a finger to indicate the ring of Indians out there beyond the town line. She had seen their reservations. “The Indians are” — she leaned in, dropping her voice even lower — “are filthy.”But Arpaio, she said, kept the town clean.The rally was scheduled for 11, but it wouldn’t begin until after 12, and most of us had been there since 8, 7 a.m. It was close to 2 p.m. when Trump at last took the stage. Trump never tries to dress like a common man, but today he was tieless, his white shirt open beneath a navy blazer and a red Make America Great Again cap pulled down so low you couldn’t see his eyes.“Whoa! Whoa!” he shouted. “Man!” Behind him the mountains, before him a sea of red faces. The crowd unshaded their eyes. An elderly woman beside me with a pink-and-white Trump cap propped atop her floppy sun hat rose to her toes.Trump began, as he so often does, with a recitation not of winners but of losers. Most of all “the establishment.” “They don’t know how to win! They haven’t won in a long time,” he said, growling through a litany of defeats. Each one cranked the crowd higher. The excitement at the beginning of a Trump rally may at first seem negative, but it’s a necessary prelude to Trumpian positivity, a method Trump could have borrowed directly from Norman Vincent Peale: “First,” Peale wrote, “it is important to discover why you have these feelings of no power.” Trump counted the reasons. “Bad things happening!” he shouted. “Crime all over the place!” Yes, exclaimed the crowd, because “crime all over the place” is the reason towns like Fountain Hills exist, a walled cluster of walled clusters in which people dream of the biggest wall of all.“You had the killing of Kate, the killing of Jamiel,” called Trump, chopping his hand down with the names. The crowd knew who they were. Kate Steinle, a pretty blonde out for a walk on a San Francisco pier when an undocumented immigrant shot her; Jamiel Shaw Jr., a high-school football star, also killed by an “illegal.”“You had so many killings,” Trump shouted. “So much crime.” But then he held up a finger, and his voice dropped into a deep and deliberate monotone: “It’s gonna end.”There it was: the positivity, not a promise or a prediction. A fact.“I guarantee you this: Nobody, and I mean nobody, is gonna mess with us anymore.” “U.S.A.,” the crowd chanted. “I love you too,” Trump crooned. “I love you! I love you!” Trump! Trump! Winning, now. “Nafta,” he sneered. The crowd booed. “We will make great deals!” The crowd cheered. Trump deals: “You do ’em one at a time, folks,” he said, mincing, holding his thumb and finger apart to show something small, deals he would crush as he had Marco Rubio. “One at a time,” he said, putting one down and picking one up: Little Vietnam, Little Japan. “One at a time. And if they misbehave” — the crowd’s cue to laugh — “if they don’t treat us properly, we terminate. We put ’em in the shed. And then” — he shrugged — “maybe they come back.”Everything was winning from then on. He took out “The Snake” — it appeared to be handwritten — and drove by the question of temperament (“Act presidential! Act presidential!” he said, mimicking his wife, Melania, and his daughter Ivanka).But then, instead of reading “The Snake,” he opted to make “The Call.” He put his fist to his ear like a phone. “Hello? This is the president,” he said, like a boy making a prank call. He didn’t even need to tell the crowd what he would say next. “It’s so much fun for me!” he cried. “I love doing it! Please don’t take that away!”Take it away? They planned to give it to him: the power to Make. That. Call.“So I call up,” he continued. “I say, ‘Listen, here’s the story.’ ” He’ll tell the executive on the other end — this time from Carrier, the air-conditioner company that recently announced plans to lay off 1,400 people and build a factory in Mexico — that he has seen pictures of their new facility, he loves it, it’s beautiful, but, again, “here’s the story”: Every A/C that comes across the border will be taxed 35 percent.“And I will get a call within 24 hours,” Trump went on, exultant. “And he will say to me, the head of Carrier, he will say, ‘Mr. President, we’ve decided to stay in the United States.’ ”The crowd cheered, as if it had already happened. Which, in a sense peculiar to the church of Trump — in which in the ecstasy of confidence itself is the ultimate win — it might as well have.To the right of me, the crowd rippled: hands in the air, pushing a small circle of young black men and a white boy with a “Dump Trump” T-shirt, hands ripping it off him. I squeezed closer. One of the black men hurtled sideways, falling into the man in front of me, and like dominoes we started to go down. The press of bodies kept me standing, but my arm swung behind me, and I hit an old woman. She smiled at me, neither hurt nor afraid.When I looked again, the fight was gone. So, too, the disrupters, tugged away by security. We flowed into the empty space, that much closer to Trump, who rolled on, deep into a crescendo of victories. In every aspect of our lives, he said; so much, he said, at every level, all the time. The memory of the fight dissolved into his tide of good feeling, as if the dream of violence, Trump’s and the crowd’s, had simply been a prelude for the winning to come. It was filling them already, now that the losers were gone, vanished, as if loss itself had been disappeared.Jeff Sharlet is an associate professor of English at Dartmouth College. His most recent book is “Radiant Truths.” He last wrote for the magazine about night-shift workers on Instagram.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement