https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/24/us/politics/paul-manafort-to-testify-before-house-intelligence-panel.html
Paul Manafort to Testify Before House Intelligence Panel - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1606
AdvertisementSupported byBy Emmarie HuettemanWASHINGTON — Paul Manafort, who served as President Trump’s campaign manager and is under scrutiny for his ties to Russia, will testify before the House Intelligence Committee, the panel’s chairman said on Friday.The chairman, Representative Devin Nunes, Republican of California, said Mr. Manafort had volunteered to appear before the committee as it conducts its own investigation into Russian interference in the election. Jason Maloni, Mr. Manafort’s spokesman, confirmed the announcement.“Mr. Manafort instructed his representatives to reach out to committee staff and offer to provide information voluntarily regarding recent allegations about Russian interference in the election,” Mr. Maloni said in a statement. “As Mr. Manafort has always maintained, he looks forward to meeting with those conducting serious investigations of these issues to discuss the facts.”Mr. Manafort has offered to appear before the Senate Intelligence Committee as well, according to a Senate official who requested anonymity to discuss committee business.Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, the Intelligence Committee’s Democratic vice chairman, had said the committee wanted to talk to Mr. Manafort because members were concerned about his connections to a former Ukrainian president and a Russian tycoon close to President Vladimir V. Putin.It is unclear when Mr. Manafort will testify before either committee. A considerable amount of preparation is required before such hearings, including research and interviewing other witnesses. And considering the serious questions surrounding Mr. Manafort’s connections, Democratic lawmakers in particular will want to take their time preparing.Evidence that heightened suspicions about Mr. Manafort emerged this week, when a member of Ukraine’s Parliament released documents showing that the former Trump adviser had tried to hide payments connected to his work for the former president of Ukraine, Viktor F. Yanukovych, apparently by funneling some money through an offshore account and masking it as payment for computers.Mr. Manafort denied the allegation.The Associated Press also reported that, before working for Mr. Trump, Mr. Manafort had secretly worked for a Russian billionaire, Oleg Deripaska, to promote Mr. Putin’s government in the United States, offering strategies to sway politics, news coverage and business deals.It was Mr. Manafort’s questionable ties to Russia that ended his stint running Mr. Trump’s campaign. Days after The New York Times reported in August that he was designated to collect $12.7 million in undisclosed, potentially illegal payments from a pro-Russia political party in Ukraine, Mr. Manafort resigned from the campaign.Mr. Manafort worked for the campaign for about five months, in particular as a strategist hired to help woo delegates. He had been known in recent years for his international political work.In a decision that Democrats immediately rebuked, Mr. Nunes said on Friday that he would replace a scheduled public hearing with former intelligence and law enforcement officials with a closed-door proceeding to hear from the directors of the F.B.I. and the National Security Agency. Those officials, James B. Comey and Adm. Michael S. Rogers, testified in a public hearing before the committee on Monday.Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the House panel’s top Democrat, denounced Mr. Nunes for canceling the hearing, which was scheduled for Tuesday, with James R. Clapper Jr., the former director of national intelligence; John O. Brennan, the former C.I.A. director; and Sally Q. Yates, who served as acting attorney general in January.Calling it “an attempt to choke off” public information, Mr. Schiff said Mr. Nunes had scuttled the hearing under pressure from the White House after Monday’s hearing.Despite frustrations with Mr. Nunes’s recent decisions, Democrats welcomed the opportunity to question Mr. Manafort.“Democrats feel that if we’re not engaged in this investigation, no one will be,” Mr. Schiff said in a news conference at the Capitol. “And there are some, I’m sure, in this building who would like nothing more than this investigation to go away. From my point of view, that would be irresponsible of us.”Advertisement