https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/dining/rose-wine-20-under-20-dollars.html
20 Wines Under $20: The Savory Side of Rosé - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
569
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovIf for no other reason than popular demand, summer is rosé season.These wines, once pitilessly disparaged as dull and anemic, have been hotter than July for a decade, a climatic shift that shows no signs of letting up. In the past few months, three books on rosé have been published, possibly doubling the number of volumes on rosé in all of time.As if to cement rosé’s evolution from trend to institution, Vogue now suggests that the wine has oversaturated the summer market and is a fashionable bubble ready to burst.I will skip the debate over pink wine’s cultural meaning. Speaking strictly from a wine point of view, when rosé crossed over to become a symbol of pleasurable summer living, it was time to beware.The wine industry sought to capitalize on rosé’s popularity by making more of it. A lot more of it. Much of it is pretty dreadful, sped along the assembly line to be ready by late spring, yet short-lived enough to be dead by the end of summer. Ephemeral, but such pretty colors.Nonetheless, for those who care, good rosés, made conscientiously, are out there. The best — the sort of rosés that can age and evolve like any other good wine — have risen in price. But for roughly $15 to $20, the sweet spot for good value in wine, you can find remarkable rosés from many corners of the wine-producing world.These 20 rosés, all under $20 a bottle, are far from the insipid ones that clothe a little fruit and sweetness in chic pink. My picks show the savory side of rosé. Indeed, some of these taste almost salty — fresh, saline sprays of summer that are nonetheless as refreshing as they are delicious.While it pays to be serious about finding good rosé, it is also important not to be too serious when drinking it. Serve it cold, but not icy — though if you do, it will warm up soon enough in the summer heat. Good glasses are pleasant though not essential; tumblers are fine, too.Drink it with lunch. Drink it with dinner. Or drink it just for fun, inside or outdoors. Drink it on a rooftop or a deck, at the beach or by the pool. Or, if you are like me and cherish summers in Manhattan when so many people leave town, enjoy it while listening to the blissful silence of empty streets.Here, in no particular order, are 20 rosés, each under $20.IDLEWILD MENDOCINO COUNTY THE FLOWER, FLORA & FAUNA ROSÉ 2016 $19.96Advice for camp cooking, picnics and potlucks, along with recipes, cocktails, frozen desserts and a taste-test of the best supermarket hot dogs.Sam Bilbro’s family is behind the idiosyncratic Marietta winery in Northern California, so it is not surprising that his own project, Idlewild, would also have the idiosyncratic goal of making wines from northwestern Italian varieties in Mendocino. The Flower is a delightful rosé, made of dolcetto, nebbiolo and barbera. It smells like red fruits, flowers and citrus but is savory, almost salty, and delicious.SCHLOSS GOBELSBURG NIEDERÖSTERREICH ROSÉ CISTERCIEN 2016 $15.99When its cork is pulled, this Austrian wine is fizzy with residual carbon dioxide, but the bubbles dissipate quickly. The resulting still wine, a combination of zweigelt, pinot noir and St. Laurent, offers aromas of peaches and berries. On the palate it is bone-dry and invigorating, with a bracingly fresh underlying citrus flavor. (A Terry Theise Estate Selection/Skurnik Wines, New York)LOS BERMEJOS LANZAROTE CANARY ISLANDS LISTÁN ROSADO 2016 $19.99Lanzarote is the easternmost of the Canary Islands, closer to northwestern Africa and the Sahara than it is to Spain. Each vine must be trained low on the volcanic rock and protected from the extremely windy conditions. This superb, well-balanced wine, made of listán negro, is both fruity and savory, with flavors of peaches, minerals and what whiskey writers like to call “iodine.” (David Bowler Wine, New York)KARINA ET GUILLAUME LEFÈVRE DOMAINE DE SULAUZE COTEAUX D’AIX-EN-PROVENCE POMPONETTE ROSÉ 2016 $17.99This pale salmon-colored rosé from Provence is nervy, direct and refreshing. It is made from a biodynamically grown blend of red grapes — mostly grenache, with some syrah, cinsault and mourvèdre — and a bit of white (rolle, as vermentino is known in southern France). It is savory and saline, with the enticing scent of meadow flowers. (Polaner Selections, Mount Kisco, N.Y.)HORSE & PLOW NORTH COAST ROSÉ 2016 $19.96This rosé, from a husband-and-wife producer in Northern California, is made of organic old-vine carignan grapes. It is savory, stony and totally refreshing, with flavors of red berries and citrus and a lingering saline edge.CHÂTEAU PEYRASSOL CÔTES DE PROVENCE ROSÉ COMMANDERIE DE PEYRASSOL 2016 $19.99This is the archetypal Provençal rosé: pale pink and made from a typical blend of grapes, usually cinsault, grenache and syrah. With the aromas of fresh fruit and warm stones, the wine has presence and depth, and still goes down easy. (Rosenthal Wine Merchant, New York)CASTELL’IN VILLA TOSCANA ROSATO I.G.T. LA GAZZARA 2016 $15.99This rosato, just one of several Italian words for rosés (including cerasuolo and ramato), comes from a historic producer of Chianti Classico. Naturally, it is made of sangiovese, the grape of Chianti. While it smells of flowers and bath powder, this lovely wine has a peachy flavor that is nonetheless savory, earthy and sinewy. (Polaner Selections)BIRICHINO CALIFORNIA VIN GRIS 2016 $17.99Birichino, a Central Coast négociant, has appeared regularly in the 20 Under $20 columns for the simple reason that its wines are always good and good values. This rosé, made from a host of southern French varieties, is bone-dry with a savory edge, just right for burgers or the sort of Mediterranean dishes you might serve at an outdoor lunch.BODEGAS ZUDUGARAI GETARIAKO TXAKOLINA ANTXIOLA ROSADO 2016 $16.99Txakolina is the refreshing wine of choice in the Basque region of northern Spain, and has proved resoundingly popular in the United States, especially the rosés. The Antxiola, pale salmon in color, smells like red berries and is mildly effervescent. On the palate, however, the wine tastes as if the grapes, grown on the southern edge of the Bay of Biscay, were hit by blasts of salt sea air. At just 11 percent alcohol, this would be a good lunch wine. (Polaner Selections)MAS DE GOURGONNIER LES BAUX DE PROVENCE ROSÉ 2016 $15.99This Provençal rosé is a tad firmer than is typical, courtesy of a high proportion of cabernet sauvignon added to the otherwise familiar blend of grenache, cinsault and mourvèdre. It is floral, earthy and savory, and despite the cabernet, is as easygoing, flirtatious and transporting as any other Provençal rosé. (Skurnik Wines)PHEASANT’S TEARS KAKHETI, GEORGIA RKATSITELI ROSÉ 2015 $17.99This excellent, unusual rosé comes from the country of Georgia, one of the most ancient wine regions in the world, from an odd pigmented clone of the white rkatsiteli grape. And it is made in the ancient way: The grapes, indigenous to Georgia, are fermented in qvevri, clay amphora-like vessels lined with beeswax and buried in the earth.20 PhotosView Slide Show ›Atypically for a rosé, the juice is fermented with the grape skins for 10 days, giving the wine color and a pleasant rasp of tannin. It smells like flowers and herbs, and is a wine of real substance, though it is low in alcohol, at just 11.5 percent. (Terrell Wines, San Francisco)ROSÉ DE PRINTEMPS CÔTES DE PROVENCE ROSÉ 2016 $15Rosé de Printemps translates to “rosé of spring,” but this bone-dry, peppery wine is more a refreshing wine of summer. Grassroots Wine, an excellent importer and distributor in the Southern United States, getes this wine from a cooperative in the Carcès region of Provence. In a word, “deelish.” (Grassroots Wine, Birmingham, Ala.)BONNY DOON CENTRAL COAST VIN GRIS DE CIGARE 2016 $15.96“The wine does not overwhelm one with fruitybombasticity,” wrote Randall Grahm, the proprietor and chief coinage officer of Bonny Doon. He is correct. This is a dark rosé, relatively full-bodied and not at all shy, with aromas of red fruit and flowers, all within a savory framework that provides shape and energy. It is a blend of both red and white grapes, including grenache, grenache blanc, mourvèdre, carignan, cinsault and roussanne.MEINKLANG ÖSTERREICH FRIZZANTE ROSÉ 2016 $17.96Can a wine be both sweet and savory? Rarely, but this excellent biodynamic Austrian estate proves it can be done with this lightly sparkling rosé. Made of pinot noir, the rosé is a touch sweet (and only 10.5 percent alcohol). Its vibrant acidity and savory tang render it fresh and thoroughly refreshing? (KWSelection.com/Artisanal Cellars, White River Junction, Vt.)TRIENNES MÉDITERRANÉE I.G.P. ROSÉ 2016 $15.99Yes, it is true that the Triennes estate in Provence was founded by two of Burgundy’s most venerated names: Aubert de Villaine of Domaine de la Romanée-Conti and Jacques Seysses of Domaine Dujac. But that would not be reason enough to pay attention to this rosé if it were not also delicious. The wine, made mostly of cinsault, with handfuls of syrah, grenache and merlot, smells of berries and flowers with savory, saline edges. (The Sorting Table, Napa, Calif.)LEITZ RHEINGAU PINOT NOIR ROSÉ TROCKEN 2016 $16.99Johannes Leitz is a top Rheingau producer whose best wines are old-vine rieslings grown on impossibly steep slopes. Pinot noir rosé must be a sort of cash cow, but who could begrudge him when the wine is so pleasing and refreshing. It is bone-dry and smells like pinot noir, but its savory flavors give it another dimension. (Schatzi Wines, Milan, N.Y.)DOMAINE POLI ÎLE DE BEAUTÉ I.G.P. NIELLUCCIU ROSÉ 2016 $13.99No surprise that Corsica is nicknamed Île de Beauté. It is one of the most beautiful places I have ever visited, with views of the Mediterranean in one direction and snow-capped peaks in the other. The wines are beautiful and distinctive, too. This one, made from niellucciu, genetically similar to sangiovese but adapted over time to Corsica, is salty, savory and refreshing. (Regal Wine Imports, Moorestown, N.J.)WÖLFFER ESTATE LONG ISLAND ROSÉ 2016 $18.99For New Yorkers who would like to drink local, and for anyone else simply interested in a good rosé, Wölffer Estate on the South Fork of Long Island makes this dry, fresh and pleasing blend of cabernet franc, cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay, merlot and riesling. It is peachy and well balanced with an underlying note of anise.FRANÇOIS CHIDAINE TOURAINE ROSÉ 2016 $14.99The winemaker François Chidaine, best known for his excellent Montlouis, makes this zesty rosé from the red grapes grolleau, pinot noir and gamay. It is rather full-bodied with a color almost of maraschino cherries. The wine is bone-dry and floral, with a kind of dark, herbal edge. (Polaner Selections)JEAN-PAUL BRUN BEAUJOLAIS ROSÉ LE ROSÉ D’FOLIE 2016 $15.96I am a fan of just about anything Jean-Paul Brun produces, from his cru Beaujolais to his straightforward Beaujolais L’Ancien Vieilles Vignes and Beaujolais Blanc to this lovely rosé, made of gamay mostly from young vines. The wine, a gorgeous shade of pale cherry, is softly fruity with a lively, stony core. Refreshing and to the point. (Louis/Dressner Selections, New York)Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated the importer of the Jean-Paul Brun Beaujolais Rosé. It is Louis/Dressner Selections, not David Bowler Wine.EMAIL asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.cookingAdvertisement