https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/28/books/review/gardener-and-the-carpenter-alison-gopnik.html
Memo to Parents: Back Off, and Children Learn More - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1361
AdvertisementSupported byNonfictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Ruth GrahamTHE GARDENER AND THE CARPENTERWhat the New Science of Child Development Tells Us About the Relationship Between Parents and ChildrenBy Alison Gopnik302 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $26.There’s something paradoxical about books on parenting: Reading is said to expand one’s world, but caring for small children seems just as sure to shrink it. Parents lose whole days — months! decades! — to monitoring the moods and effluvia of their offspring. Why won’t the baby sleep? Why won’t the toddler obey? Why won’t the teenager sleep and obey? The love is abundant, sure, but there’s an awful lot of laundry that comes with it.It’s refreshing, therefore, to read a book about raising children by a writer whose instinct is to telescope out and look at the job from a loftier perspective. In previous books, including “The Philosophical Baby,” the developmental psychologist Alison Gopnik has argued that the complex minds of children and the way they approach the world can help us better understand the human condition. In her latest, “The Gardener and the Carpenter,” she takes a similarly sweeping approach, contending that children are such naturals at learning and playing and innovating that parents should just loosen up and let them do their thing. “We can’t make children learn,” she writes, “but we can let them learn.”Gopnik does not bother sniping helicopter parents or hunting tiger moms, who at this late date are easy prey for parental pontificators. Instead, she takes aim at the whole premise of modern parenting, “that if parents just practice the right techniques, they can make a substantial difference in the way their child turns out.” Raising children has become a job, Gopnik writes, and it’s a high-pressure one even for those of us who fancy ourselves to be low-key types. These days, even letting one’s children play outdoors has become an official philosophy, with its own label (“free range”), guidebooks and rules. Her diagnosis will resonate painfully with anyone trying to raise good humans in a ­relentlessly outcome-obsessed culture.Co-sleeping or crying it out, forcing extra homework or letting kids goof around — very little of it has predictable effects on a child’s future, Gopnik writes. Marshaling evidence from sources including evolutionary biology and her own Berkeley lab, she argues that the kids’ll be all right pretty much no matter what their parents do. At the very least, they won’t be much different than they were going to be anyway. Children are learning all the time, whether an adult thinks she is teaching them or not, and they are almost terrifyingly astute. In one experiment, for example, 18-month-olds watch someone with her arms bound up in a blanket using her head to bang on a box and make it light up. When it’s the toddlers’ turn to light up the box, they use their hands. But if the adult’s hands are free and she still uses her head to turn on the light, the children use their own heads, too. That’s a remarkably sophisticated bit of reasoning for people still in diapers. The middle chapters of “The Gardener and the Carpenter” are stuffed with absorbing bite-size summaries of similar research, demonstrating children’s intuitive grasp of concepts like probability, reliability and ontology.It’s in teasing out the implications of all this evidence where things get both fuzzy and frustrating. Gopnik’s title comes from her idea that modern parents too often approach their tasks like a carpenter, attempting to shape the raw material into a particular finished product. Better to be a gardener, she writes, cultivating “a protected and nurturing space for plants to flourish” but realizing that the greatest beauty comes when we relinquish total control. After all, the whole point about the future is that we don’t know exactly what we’ll face there. If children are specially built to adapt and innovate, then it’s counterproductive to overschedule their time and overdetermine their interests.So far, so good. True to her own ethos, Gopnik goes light on prescriptions for individual parents, though some of them may wonder what exactly it looks like to be the beatific “gardener” of a 6-year-old shrieking for iPhone time. She offers some concluding thoughts on the political and educational implications of the garden model. But she is more interested in proclamations about how the relationship between caregivers and children teaches us what it means to be human. No one would contradict the idea that, for example, raising children is about love. But if no one would contradict it, then do we really need to read chapters of proof?In the end, Gopnik’s woodworker starts to look more like a straw man. Only cartoonish control freaks are obsessive about turning their children into scientists or senators and nothing else. On the other hand, how many parents could possibly be so blithe about “gardening” that they could accept Gopnik’s laissez-faire openness to “watching that most promising of sprouts wither unexpectedly”? Whenever Gopnik edges up to confronting what this looks like in practice, she gestures to “paradox” and “mystery” and “moral depth” and pulls back to reassure the reader that this is really about the species as a whole. “From the point of view of evolution,” she writes, “trying to consciously shape how your children will turn out is both futile and self-defeating.” It’s all well and good to know that humans will be fine “from the point of view of evolution.” But no one gets up early to do laundry for a species.Ruth Graham is a contributing writer at Slate. Advertisement