https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/theater/nyc-this-weekend-theater.html
15 Plays and Musicals to Go to in N.Y.C. This Weekend - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
471
AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexis SoloskiOur guide to plays and musicals coming to New York stages and a few last-chance picks of shows that are about to close. Our reviews of open shows are at nytimes.com/reviews/theater.‘ALL MY SONS’ at the American Airlines Theater (in previews; opens on April 22). The sinful fathers and the suffering sons are back on Broadway. In Arthur Miller’s post-mortem on the American dream, Tracy Letts and Annette Bening star, along with Benjamin Walker, Francesca Carpanini and Hampton Fluker. After a casting dispute, Jack O’Brien replaced Gregory Mosher as the director. 212-719-1300, roundabouttheatre.org‘BEETLEJUICE’ at the Winter Garden Theater (in previews, opens on April 25). A musical adaptation of the revered Tim Burton film, and maybe also a chilling allegory about the perils of remodeling, this antic ghost story arrives on Broadway. Alex Timbers directs, with songs by Eddie Perfect, a book by Scott Brown and Anthony King and an eye-boggling set by David Korins. 212-239-6200, beetlejuicebroadway.com‘BLKS’ at the Newman Mills Theater at the Robert W. Wilson MCC Theater Space (previews start on April 23; opens on May 9). Same city. Same sex. Opposite sex, too. Aziza Barnes’s comedy looks at 24 hours in the sexual, professional and emotional lives of a group of black friends (Paige Gilbert, Alfie Fuller, Antoinette Crowe-Legacy) in New York City. Robert O’Hara directs the play for MCC. 212-727-7722, mcctheater.org‘CURSE OF THE STARVING CLASS’ at the Pershing Square Signature Center (previews start on April 23; opens on May 13). In Sam Shepard’s brutal and funny rural California psychodrama, revived by Signature and directed by Terry Kinney, family life is rough on doors, artichokes, a chicken, a lamb and most every person involved. Maggie Siff and David Warshofsky play Mom and Dad. 212-244-7529, signaturetheatre.org‘GARY: A SEQUEL TO TITUS ANDRONICUS’ at the Booth Theater (in previews; opens on April 21). It’s all fun and games until dynastic conflict pretty much destroys Rome, and some poor saps have to mop up the blood. In Taylor Mac’s new play, a follow-up to Shakespeare’s plasma-spattered “Titus Andronicus,” those saps are played by Nathan Lane and Kristine Nielsen, with Julie White. George C. Wolfe directs. 212-239-6200, garyonbroadway.com[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]‘GRIEF IS THE THING WITH FEATHERS’ at St. Ann’s Warehouse (previews start on April 20; opens on April 28). In Enda Walsh’s adaptation of Max Porter’s poetic novel, for Wayward Productions and Complicité, a father and two sons grapple with a mother’s sudden death. The arrival of a crow effects some healing. The bereaved father and possibly metaphorical bird unite in the agile body of Cillian Murphy. 718-254-8779, stannswarehouse.org‘INK’ at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater (in previews; opens on April 24). James Graham’s indelible drama reports on the early career of Rupert Murdoch. When Ben Brantley saw the play in London last year, he called it a “fiendishly entertaining, if structurally unbalanced, new play.” For Manhattan Theater Club, Bertie Carvel and Jonny Lee Miller star. Rupert Goold directs.212-239-6200, manhattantheatreclub.com‘THE PAIN OF MY BELLIGERENCE’ at Playwrights Horizons (in previews; opens on April 22). In just a few years, Halley Feiffer has become one of our foremost chroniclers of female rage, ambivalence and devastation. In this new play, Feiffer stars as Cat, a whip-smart journalist, and Hamish Linklater is Guy, the married man who derails her career ambitions. Trip Cullman directs. 212-279-4200, playwrightshorizons.org‘PASSAGE’ at Soho Rep (previews start on April 23; opens on May 5). Can the oppressors and the oppressed hang out? Christopher Chen, a form-breaking playwright, offers a dreamy anatomy of colonialism, imagining Country X, which is ruled by Country Y, and the citizens caught in the middle. Saheem Ali directs. 866-811-4111, sohorep.org‘PAUL SWAN IS DEAD AND GONE’ at Torn Page (previews start on April 25; opens on May 1). Swan, “the most beautiful man in the world,” is in residence at a Chelsea townhouse. In this new drama from the Civilians, a quasi-documentary troupe, the playwright Claire Kiechel resurrects Swan, an artist, a dancer and her great-great uncle. Steve Cosson directs Tony Torn, Robert Johanson, Helen Cespedes and Alexis Scott. 718-230-3330, thecivilians.org‘SAFEWORD’ at the American Theater of Actors (in previews; opens on April 25). The playwright and director S. Asher Gelman follows up “Afterglow,” a provocative play about an open marriage, with another sexually charged drama. A tale of two chefs, a power dom and his genderqueer partner, it explores bondage, domination and fine dining. 866-811-4111, safewordtheplay.com‘TOOTSIE’ at the Marquis Theater (in previews; opens on April 23). David Yazbek and Robert Horn adapt the beloved 1982 movie about Michael Dorsey, an actor who will do anything — even waist training — for a part. (Here it’s a role in a Broadway musical. Very meta.) Santino Fontana and a bold red wig star alongside Lilli Cooper, Sarah Stiles and John Behlmann. Scott Ellis directs. tootsiemusical.com‘DO YOU FEEL ANGER?’ at the Vineyard Theater (closes on April 27). Mara Nelson-Greenberg’s very dark comedy, about an empathy coach trying to civilize an unwoke collection agency, gives its final notice. Ben Brantley wrote that the play “aspires to more than caricatures of dangerously devolved masculinity,” adding that Nelson-Greenberg is also “considering the ways in which women unthinkingly absorb a poisoned social system.” 212-353-0303, vineyardtheatre.org‘THE LEHMAN TRILOGY’ at the Park Avenue Armory (closes on April 20). This history of the brokerage house turned failed investment giant conducts its last transactions. Ben Brantley wrote that Sam Mendes’s production of Stefano Massini’s play, adapted by Ben Power and starring Simon Russell Beale, Ben Miles and Adam Godley, “unfolds a tale of extravagant wealth with an even more dazzling economy of means.” The shows have sold out, but in addition to a cancellation line that will form two hours before each performance, rush tickets will be released on the website at noon. 212-933-5812, armoryonpark.org‘LIFE SUCKS’ at Wild Project (closes on April 20). This sort-of adaptation of “Uncle Vanya,” by the “Stupid _______ Bird” playwright Aaron Posner, wraps up its cleverly melancholic run. Elisabeth Vincentelli wrote that the play, which stars Jeff Biehl, “understands full well that there is no date stamp on feeling stranded between regrets and hopes, between fancy dreams and the banality of existence.” 212-228-1195, thewildproject.comAn earlier version of this article misstated that Andrea Martin would appear in “Gary: A Sequel to Titus Andronicus.” Martin was injured and left the production; Kristine Nielsen has taken over her role.Advertisement