https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/02/smarter-living/5-cheap-ish-things-to-get-you-started-with-trail-running.html
5 Cheap(ish) Things to Get You Started With Trail Running - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
137
AdvertisementSupported byTrail running is like stepping into a different world. Here’s the gear to get you there.By Jen A. MillerTired of running on blacktop and sidewalks, especially as the summer sun beats down? I have an idea: try trail running.Trail running is of course running, but it’s stepping into a different world, one where there’s often trees, rocks, branches and boulders to avoid and/or run over. It’s more engaged and, for me, more fun, and when it’s 95 degrees outside, I’d much rather play in the woods than run in a straight line on a road.You don’t need a ton of different gear to try trails — I’ve been running on trails for five years and have very little specialized gear. But a few small things can make the road — or trail — easier going, and safer too. In collaboration with Wirecutter, a New York Times company that reviews and recommends products, here are five cheap(ish) things to get you started with trail running.You probably won’t find water fountains or a store selling bottled water in the middle of the woods, so in the summer, I always carry water with me. This isn’t just because it’s hot, but a safety issue too: I’ve gotten lost on trail runs, and being lost without water is not an appealing prospect.Wirecutter has recommendations for hand-held bottles and waist packs. Yes, a lot of trail running is done in the shade, but I’ve run many trail races where the course included open fields of full sun, and if you try mountain running that takes you above the tree line, that shade disappears. That’s why even with trail running, sunscreen is still a must. Wirecutter’s pick is the Coppertone Ultra Guard Sunscreen Lotion SPF 70. I always keep a can of both sunscreen and bug spray in my car. Because if you run on trails long enough, you will fall. My kit is a very basic CVS one that’s about the size of a trade paperback book and fits under the passenger seat of my car. One thing to keep in mind: Make sure your kit has tweezers. Why? Ticks. If you’re bitten by one, you want to pull it out as soon as possible.Wirecutter recommends the Adventure Medical Kits Mountain Backpacker Kit.Why is this on the cheap(ish) list? Because I’m going to tell you that you do not need to go out and buy new shoes if you’re just trying out trails. Your road running shoes will do just fine. Some runners never buy trail-specific shoes.My advice: Run in your regular shoes, and see if you feel like you need something trail specific, which happened to me after running on the Bent Creek Trail in the Pisgah National Forest in North Carolina. The folks at Jus’ Running in Asheville, N.C., helped me pick out the perfect pair of trail running shoes.Wirecutter recommends the Saucony Peregrine 7. Just remember that picking running shoes is a personal choice, so go with whatever works best for you. Ankle-high socks may be flattering, but they won’t protect you from the branches and thorns that will reach out and try to grab your lower legs while you’re running on trails. I always wear socks that come above my ankles, often ones that come up to my calf or knee.I wear a whole bunch of different brands, including Sock Guy, Swiftwick and CEP compression socks. My favorite pair is the not-quite-SFW pair, which are cycling socks from 8 Lumens. They’re a hit in trail races. It’s just that kind of crowd. How to Clean Those Pesky Summer Stains It’s the season of hot dog condiment blobs, stubborn sunscreen residue and sweat stains … everywhere. Here’s how to clean things up.The Midlife Tuneup Our health needs change with every passing decade, but the good news is that it’s never too late to start taking better care of yourself. Graduation Gift Ideas With help from our friends at Wirecutter, we’ve curated a selection of gifts to help cash-strapped graduates get a head start on their new lives without weighing them down (think a single great skillet instead of a set of pots and pans).How to Clean Your Filthy, Disgusting Laptop Like any tool we use every day, our laptops accumulate dust, grime, oils from our skin and who knows what else. Yours is probably due for a cleaning, and here’s how to do it right.The Tech You Need to Travel Better While no product can guarantee a seat upgrade or make your delayed flight arrive on time, a few smart investments can make your next trip more comfortable, more relaxing and less stressful.The Travel Tips Issue A collection of travel tips and techniques, including a round-table discussion between the five writers who have served as Frugal Traveler columnists, suggestions for packing for long-term travel from our 52 Places Traveler, and ideas for tech gear, insurance and more.This fantastic story from Nautilus looks at empathy and how we can — or cannot — step into another person’s shoes by trying to take their perspective. “After testing the impact perspective-taking had on the accuracy of interpersonal judgments in 25 experiments, the researchers concluded, ‘If anything, perspective-taking decreased accuracy overall while increasing confidence in judgment.’”Advertisement