https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/06/books/review/ottessa-moshfegh-my-year-of-rest-and-relaxation.html
A Woman Sleeps a Year Away in Ottessa Moshfegh’s Darkly Comic New Novel - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2170
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Vendela VidaMY YEAR OF REST AND RELAXATION By Ottessa Moshfegh 288 pp. Penguin Press. $26.In “Eileen,” Ottessa Moshfegh’s riveting 2015 novel (a Man Booker finalist), a miserable woman in her mid-20s dreams of escaping X-ville, the Massachusetts town where she was raised and where she tended to her dying mother. Eileen spends her evenings pacifying her alcoholic father with bottles of booze, and her days laboring as a secretary at a correctional facility for boys. One day a beautiful woman named Rebecca comes to work at the prison and entangles Eileen in a noirish plot that reveals how wholly original a character Eileen really is. The book is narrated by an older Eileen, who tells the tale of how she succeeded in liberating herself from her past — she’s changed her name, both first and last, and has moved to New York, never having returned to X-ville. “Eileen” is the story of how she disappeared.“My Year of Rest and Relaxation,” Moshfegh’s darkly comic and ultimately profound new novel, also concerns itself with a miserable woman in her mid-20s seeking “great transformation.” This unnamed narrator, however, takes a vastly different approach: She plans to spend a year sleeping. “Sleep felt productive,” she tells the reader. “Something was getting sorted out. I knew in my heart — this was, perhaps, the only thing my heart knew back then — that when I’d slept enough, I’d be O.K. I’d be renewed, reborn. I would be a whole new person, every one of my cells regenerated enough times that the old cells were just distant, foggy memories.”The year is 2000, the narrator’s parents are both dead, and she lives in an Upper East Side apartment she bought in cash with her inheritance. But she’s not dealing with her grief. She sees a psychiatrist, the bizarre Dr. Tuttle, only for the drugs she knows she needs to fulfill her year of sleep. Another doctor might delve into the deaths of her patient’s parents and her associations with slumber — we learn that during the narrator’s childhood sleeping was one thing she and her mother enjoyed doing together. But Dr. Tuttle is not a good doctor. She has difficulty remembering that her patient’s parents have died. During one of their sessions, the protagonist finds herself reminding Dr. Tuttle that her mother is dead, that she mixed alcohol with sedatives. “‘People like your mother,’ Dr. Tuttle replied, shaking her head, ‘give psychotropic medication a bad reputation.’” The doctor then prescribes enough sleep-inducing pills to the narrator to put her, and much of Manhattan, under for the remainder of the millennium.After being fired from her job at an art gallery for napping in a storage closet during lunchtime and botching a shipment, our protagonist prepares for her year of R & R with the same rigor that others might employ when training for a triathlon. She fills her prescriptions, files for unemployment, arranges for weekly laundry pickup and delivery service, sets up automatic payment on her utilities and purchases an array of used VHS tapes. Soon she’s “hitting the pills hard and sleeping all day and all night with two- or three-hour breaks in between.”During these breaks she primarily watches the VHS tapes, preferably anything with Harrison Ford or Whoopi Goldberg. “What do you like so much about Whoopi Goldberg?” her (only) friend, Reva, asks during one of her frequent and unwelcome visits to the apartment. “You need to be watching movies that are going to cheer you up. Like ‘Austin Powers.’ Or that one with Julia Roberts and Hugh Grant.” Reva, a former roommate from college at Columbia, is a bulimic gym rat who reads self-help books (she’s also seeking transformation), studies Cosmo and watches “Sex and the City.” Reva is jealous of the narrator’s beauty and size 2 wardrobe, telling her she looks like a blond Angelina Jolie.Reva’s cinematic tastes may tend toward pop culture, but Moshfegh’s novels have the feel of film classics. “Eileen” has the plot twists of a Hitchcock movie, and Moshfegh has said in interviews that she named the beauty in that book Rebecca, after Hitchcock’s film. In “My Year of Rest and Relaxation,” the relationship between Reva and the narrator is reminiscent of Bergman’s 1966 film “Persona,” in which a stage actress suffers a breakdown and becomes mute. She’s tended to by Alma, a garrulous nurse. Reva is as loquacious as Alma, and as fawning toward the novel’s couch-ridden narrator as Alma is toward her patient. In “Persona” the two at first seemingly opposite women begin to meld — in an iconic scene their faces mesh; similarly, as Moshfegh’s novel progresses, Reva and the narrator, at first strikingly different, increasingly resemble each other.In an attempt to shed her cocoon (as part of her planned metamorphosis), the narrator gives a gleeful Reva all her clothes and jewelry. “Thank God for Reva,” she thinks. “Her greed would unburden me of my own vanity.” The narrator’s not the only one who suspects her movie-star appearance may be imprisoning. Trevor, her fellatio-obsessed former boyfriend, says her beauty is her Achilles’ heel. “You’re too much on the surface. … It’s hard to look past what you look like.”Surfaces are important in “My Year of Rest and Relaxation.” The narrator recalls her mother, a vain and distracted bedroom drunk: “I remembered watching her ‘put her face on,’ as she called it, and wondering if one day I’d be like her, a beautiful fish in a man-made pool, circling and circling, surviving the tedium only because my memory can contain what is imprinted on the last few minutes of my life, constantly forgetting my thoughts.” As a younger adult, the narrator had harbored dreams of becoming a visual artist, but she believes she’s already failed.“‘At least I’m making an effort to go after what I want,’” an exasperated and frightened Reva tells her. “‘Besides sleeping, what do you want out of life?’ …“‘I wanted to be an artist, but I had no talent,’ I told her.“‘Do you really need talent?’“That might have been the smartest thing Reva ever said to me.“‘Yes,’ I replied.”Having given up her ambitions to create art, the narrator resigns herself to becoming art. In the first days of 2001, she runs into Ping Xi, a successful young artist she knows from her gallery job. He gained notoriety — and an expulsion from art school — for firing a gun in his studio, and has since inexplicably tattooed red zits on his chin. They reach an agreement by which, in a new stage of her sleep experiment, she’ll be locked up in her apartment for four months while he films her and paints her and feeds her. He would be the “warden of my hibernation,” she says. Their ideas about the project, though, don’t align. At the start, Ping Xi wants to film her burning her birth certificate. “I knew what he was thinking,” the narrator tells us. “He was imagining how the critics would describe the video. He needed fodder for analysis. But the project was beyond issues of ‘identity’ and ‘society’ and ‘institutions.’ Mine was a quest for a new spirit.”By the end of her self-imprisonment, a transformation does occur. Ping Xi’s show, called “Large-Headed Pictures of a Beautiful Woman,” opens, and receives mostly positive reviews, but it’s not his art that interests her. It’s her own desire to be an artist that has been reborn. She finds herself at the Met in early September 2001, shortly before 9/11, newly awakened to everything joyful and prosaic about the artist’s life. Moshfegh’s extraordinary prose soars as it captures her character’s re-engagement:“I wanted to see what other people had done with their lives, people who had made art alone, who had stared long and hard at bowls of fruit. … Did they know that glory was mundane? Did they wish they’d crushed those withered grapes between their fingers and spent their days walking through fields of grass or being in love or confessing their delusions to a priest or starving like the hungry souls they were, begging for alms in the city square with some honesty for once? Maybe they’d lived wrongly. Their greatness might have poisoned them. Did they wonder about things like that? … Maybe they understood, in fact, that beauty and meaning had nothing to do with one another. Maybe they lived as real artists knowing all along that there were no pearly gates. Neither creation nor sacrifice could lead a person to heaven.”It’s one of the only times she’s wondered about the lives of artists she admires, and one of the first times she’s truly looked beyond the frame of her television set.“Step away,” a guard reprimands her when she gets too close to a painting.She does not step back. Instead, she puts her hand out and touches the frame of the painting. Then she places her whole palm on the surface of the canvas. The guard grips her shoulders, but after she explains that she got dizzy, the guard lets her go, and she is free.Vendela Vida is a founding co-editor of The Believer magazine. Her most recent novel is “The Diver’s Clothes Lie Empty.”Advertisement