https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/08/arts/television/game-of-thrones-season-6-episode-3-rickon-stark.html
‘Game of Thrones’ Season 6, Episode 3: One Stark Returns, Another Moves On - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1712
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jeremy EgnerWhen you come back from the dead, you get to make your own rules.That was the main takeaway from Sunday’s episode of “Game of Thrones,” which began to answer some of the questions raised by last week’s resurrection of Jon Snow.Among them: Would he be the same Jon Snow? (Yes, more or less.) Would he take pity on his betrayers? (No.) Would he emerge as some sort of Christ figure or holy warrior? (No. The afterlife is dark and full of nothing, he said, despite whatever spiritual forces Melisandre thinks she drew on to bring him back.)[Ahead of the final season of “Game of Thrones,” relive it all with our ultimate watching guide, including episode recaps and deep plot dives.]Perhaps most crucially: Would he remain Lord Commander of the Night’s Watch? Or would death free him up to pursue more wide-ranging forms of world-saving? The oath is a lifetime one, but it was unclear whether it encompassed multiple lifetimes. Either it doesn’t or Jon didn’t care, handing over the feathery cloak of leadership to Dolorous Edd after putting his killers to the rope.“My watch has ended,” Jon said. The rest of the assembled were understandably reluctant to argue with a man who had just risen from the dead.Their silence made for a rare moment of verbal restraint in what was a very chatty hour of “Game of Thrones.” In King’s Landing, Cersei plotted to return to power, perhaps to her own detriment. Like everyone else, Varys and Tyrion spun their wheels in Meereen — even the best and the brightest get bogged down in geopolitical morasses. (The Meereen plotline has become its own metaphor in this regard.)Even Gilly, the formerly illiterate and laconic refugee, couldn’t shut up. She and Sam made their first appearances of the season and education has made her effusive, which was less wearying to me — I find them both very charming — than it perhaps was to her green-at-the-gills companion. (It sounds like we’re about to meet the extended Tarly clan.)The episode’s lone bit of action occurred in the past, but it was a big one: Bran vision-quested his way back to his father’s swordfight with the legendary Arthur Dayne. (More on this in a minute.)Back in the present, another Stark, Bran’s little brother Rickon, made his return to the story. Welcome back, Rickon! Sort of. Well, actually, no. I think we all could have done without seeing you this week, because 1. most of us can barely remember who you are, and 2. the whole Ramsay thing.But back to the oathbreaking zombie at Castle Black. I mentioned earlier that Jon was more or less the same, but that’s not quite right. Death hasn’t malignantly overhauled him in a “Pet Sematary” sense, but it has affected his spirit. It was a haunted Jon Snow we saw on Sunday — it’s unclear whether that derived from the bleak void he encountered on the other side or if he’s just deeply bummed about compatriots killing him, which would definitely leave a psychic mark in addition to the stab wounds.“I did what I thought was right and I got murdered for it,” he told Davos. “Now I’m back. Why?”I don’t know, exactly. I thought we might see him spare his betrayers and use his new “god”-like status to begin assembling a loyal force of fighters. But no. Only Olly gave him pause, and even that may have been Jon trying to figure out how the traitorous lad aged four years in a matter of days.The upshot is a man who has so far been defined by a sense of duty — to his family, to the Night’s Watch, to a humanity vulnerable to zombie apocalypse — seems unmoored. To the credit of the show, it has put him on a more complicated, less predictable path. It’s one that still seems destined to arc toward a clash with wintry armies of annihilation, among other existential threats. But how he gets from here to there — your guess is as good as mine.Cersei, on the other hand, seems to be on a trajectory we’ve seen before. She and Jaime are personas non grata in King’s Landing, but Cersei is planning a return to prominence and activating weapons great and small, ranging from the gray-fleshed Mountainstein, who continues to creep out everyone, to a pack of sweets-loving street urchins. The children are Varys’s former “little birds,” we learned, who are now working for Qyburn. Cersei seems to be orchestrating some sort of overthrow of the High Sparrow and his militant minions via a shifty legal proceeding and trial by combat.Because that worked out so well for everyone last time. Indeed, Cersei’s vengeance campaign feels strikingly similar to the one she began after Joffrey’s assassination, down to the personnel. You know, the one that eventually led to Tyrion shooting her father with a crossbow, Cersei getting marginalized and Ellaria Sand killing her daughter in revenge for Oberyn’s death. One wonders why she thinks this will turn out any better and I suspect the answer is, she’s not really thinking. She’s reacting, fueled by grief and anger over her humiliation and Myrcella’s death and fear for Tommen’s future, the mother’s love that the High Sparrow discussed with the impressionable boy-king.I wondered a couple of weeks ago if we would be seeing a more sympathetic Cersei this season, but so far, we seem to be getting the same one we’ve always had. She can ask her dead father or Ned Stark what tends to happen to inflexible people who fail to evolve on this show.Finally, speaking of Ned Stark, Bran’s vision took him to what seems like a key moment in the prehistory of this tale. The main event was the thrilling sword fight at what the broader Thronesweb tells me is the Tower of Joy. Lyanna Stark was apparently inside, alive. Rhaegar Targaryen, the man who official history holds kidnapped and raped her, was dead.Armed with these search terms, you are now ready for a weekslong tumble through a number of online rabbit holes, should you choose that route. But even if not, intriguing hints were at the margins of the scene. One was the fight itself, which unlike Stark lore, ended not with Ned’s honorable victory but with a sneaky stab in Ser Arthur’s back. Once again, we’re led to believe that the official version of events might not true. (Sansa’s discussion in Season 5 of Lyanna with Littlefinger, included in the pre-episode reminder reel, was similarly equivocal.)We also saw Bran call to his father from across the temporal plane. This would seem to point toward the fascinating possibility of Bran affecting past and future events.Finally, there was Lyanna herself, who keeps coming up this season, though she did so less happily this week. Her offscreen screams suggested she was in some sort of distress, perhaps after being abused or otherwise victimized by her captors. Or perhaps it was something else. Labor pains maybe? It was Mother’s Day, after all.But again, your guess is as good as mine.• There’s a fine line between conveying a sense of toil and drudgery by repeating similar scenes, and just wearing out your audience. Which is an oblique way of saying I was happy to see Arya finally stop a stick and get her eyes back on Sunday. I guess that poison pool is anything the Faceless Men want it to be?• R.I.P. Shaggydog, Rickon’s direwolf. Keep running Nymeria, wherever you are.• “A wise man once said the true history of the world is a history of great conversations in elegant rooms.” Tyrion’s doing his best to make Meereen less of a slog.• Varys is back in the intelligence racket, speaking of Meereen and little birds, working the Mata Hari Harpy and plotting some sort of counteroffensive against the rich masters underwriting the insurgenzzzzzzzzzzz…• Daenerys met the other women in the Khals’ Wives Club, receiving the customary drab brown tunic and a dose of reality from the headmistress. Yeah, yeah, storm born breaker of chains, whatever you say — we all thought we were going to rule the world one day. It turns out that thanks to her Essos peregrinations, Khaleesi hasn’t even qualified yet for the Temple of Widows. She won’t be welcome unless approved in a vote during Khalar Vezhven, which I envision as a nutty mash-up of Sturgis and Burning Man, but with more horses and fewer tech bros. So if enduring spinsterhood in a sadness shrine is the best she can hope for, what’s the worst?• Paging Littlefinger. And could you bring Bronn with you?• A note about spoilers: Lots of fan theories surround Lyanna Stark in general and the Tower of Joy in particular. Please refrain from going into these at great length in the comments, as they could be spoilers for some readers. At the same time, if you have no idea what I’m talking about and want to stay that way, tread carefully if you read the comments. These things will be tougher to avoid as the show continues to dole out this back story, bit by bit.Advertisement