https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/25/dining/thanksgiving-leftovers-recipes.html
Thanksgiving Leftovers Go Beyond the Turkey Sandwich - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2105
AdvertisementSupported byCity KitchenBy David TanisSome cooks prefer the Thanksgiving meal proper, with its generous platters and long, festive table. Others are impatient for the after-party, the prospect of raiding the fridge at midnight, or the anticipated snack the next day, when the bounty is neatly packed away.Regardless of where you fall, one thing is certain: Leftovers are a given. Embrace them.Of course, after you’ve spent the better part of a week preparing for the big meal, you may not be in the mood for another complex cooking project. If it’s just the immediate family having a grazing free-for-all, picking at congealed turkey parts and condiments, alternating with forkfuls of cold stuffing, that’s one thing, and it’s perfectly fine.But if you have more guests coming over (perhaps the ones who couldn’t make it to the main event), you may want to cobble together something more refined.Lots of things come to mind immediately. Shepherd’s pie may be at the top of the list, or that old airline standby dubiously named turkey tetrazzini. Turkey fried rice could be something, or a shredded turkey salad with a Southeast Asian inflection. A multitude of variations on turkey soup come to mind. I usually take it in a spicy direction, perhaps North African, perhaps Mexican. Turkey tostadas are also a bite-size option that isn’t too labor intensive.But consider adding these recipes to the list of repurposed turkey possibilities.I started out by playing with the notion of biscuits and gravy and the classic turkey à la king. I’m actually a huge fan of both those humble dishes, so in my mind it’s a natural marriage. Neither is exactly dainty, but this can be prepared with a light hand.Tasty, saucy, savory creamed turkey (enhanced with a little leftover gravy) is the result. You could serve this with freshly baked fluffy buttermilk biscuits, but because you’re apt to have some leftover sweet potato, you may as well make them Southern-style sweet potato biscuits.Another way to dress up all your odds and ends is to put them into a pie. Even if you’ve had your fill of sweet pies, a savory one is a different animal. An Italian-style torta rustica can be wonderful — just replace the traditional prosciutto and mozzarella with the more American ingredients on hand.The art of making a layered savory pie, especially from the remains of a feast, involves a touch of restraint. You may be inclined to use the contents of all your Tupperware, but limiting yourself to just a few is the way to go. I chose dark meat turkey, mashed potatoes, roasted squash and chard, as well as a good handful of sharp American Cheddar. This is only a suggestion; there is plenty of room for improvisation.To make it easy to execute and not the chore it may sound like, it’s quite all right to use store-bought puff pastry (unless you still have a supply of pie dough on hand). When you have the neighbors over, you’ll have prepared a meal from the leftovers that is really rather elegant. Serve this torta with gravy and cranberry sauce, or keep it light with a refreshing green salad.If you’re looking for something less complicated, how about heading in a Middle Eastern direction? Concoct a shawarma-like pulled-turkey filling to pile into a pita, changing up the Thanksgiving flavors with garlic and spices. Complete it with some lightly pickled cabbage and cucumber, and a bright tahini sauce with lemon juice, garlic, cayenne and yogurt. You’ll have a great turkey sandwich, circumnavigating the not-necessarily-requisite fallback of mayo and cranberry sauce.These are just recommendations. You may not want to veer from your traditional post-Thanksgiving rituals, whatever they may be. You could opt for a juice cleanse; you could continue gorging on leftover desserts or attacking the carcass on the countertop. Or perhaps you’re content supine on the sofa sipping mineral water instead of dining.But if you’re up for a civilized meal, any of these options certainly qualify.Recipes: Creamed Turkey With Sweet Potato Biscuits | Turkey Pie With Potatoes, Squash, Chard and Cheddar | Turkey Pita With Cabbage, Cucumbers and Tahini Dressing | Thanksgiving Menu PlannercookingcookingcookingAdvertisement