https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/13/us/kricket-nimmons-transgender-surgery.html
‘A Whole New Being’: How Kricket Nimmons Seized the Transgender Moment - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1094
After a rocky life in the South, a Brooklyn resident became one of the first New Yorkers to undergo gender reassignment surgery paid for by Medicaid.Kricket Nimmons on her way to Philadelphia to see a specialist in gender reassignment surgery.CreditCreditTodd Heisler/The New York TimesSupported byBy Deborah SontagPerched on a gurney at dawn, Kricket Jerná Nimmons, 40, kicked her feet giddily, like a girl on the edge of a pool, preparing to take a plunge. She wore a hospital gown and purple socks with paw prints. Her face was clean-scrubbed — “no lash, no makeup, just me” — and she looked at peace.“So, this is it,” she said, exhaling theatrically, which is her way.A Brooklynite by way of South Carolina and Georgia, Ms. Nimmons was ticking down the minutes, as she had ticked down the months, until she would be wheeled into an operating room for gender reassignment surgery. It was a moment she had long dreamed about but considered out of reach, a shimmer at the edge of her field of vision.Now, though, societal attitudes toward “transgenderalism,” as Ms. Nimmons calls it, were shifting so rapidly that many health plans were overturning their long-held exclusions of transition-related care. Even public insurers were approving surgical procedures that, until recently, were accessible only to those who could pay out of pocket, despite medical consensus about their safety and efficacy.Seizing the opportunity, Ms. Nimmons was about to become one of the first low-income New Yorkers to undergo a genital reconstruction paid for by Medicaid. In a few hours, if all went well, her body would be aligned with her identity for the first time, and she would no longer be “a chick with a wiener,” in her words, but “a woman in mind, body and soul, before the Lord and before the law.”Peering under the sheet that draped her that early October morning at a hospital outside Philadelphia, Ms. Nimmons bade farewell to what she called “my friend” — that “extra part” for which she was pronounced male at birth. Tattooed on her right forearm was her birth name, “Jerome,” complete with quotation marks.“When I lay down and when I wake up, I’ll be a whole new creature, a whole new being,” Ms. Nimmons declared. “Out with the old, in with the new.”Over the course of this year, Ms. Nimmons has often said she never expected to make it to 40, much less to “complete” the long, lonely journey from Jerome through Meeka (her interim name) and Magnolia Thunderpussy (her drag name) to Kricket.As a black transgender woman from the rural South, she had traversed a rocky path. She endured sexual abuse as a child, an H.I.V.-positive diagnosis and eviction from her family’s home as a teenager. She made her living by hustling, went to prison for fraud and theft, and suffered sexual assault by guards. She survived botched black-market medical procedures, suicide attempts and AIDS-related illnesses.And her experience echoed a harsh reality. The rates of extreme poverty, homelessness, H.I.V. infection, attempted suicide, assault and incarceration, which are high for transgender people as a whole, are extraordinarily high for black transgender women.“You’re talking about some of the most disempowered people in our society,” said Randi Ettner, a clinical psychologist in Evanston, Ill., and a board member of the World Professional Association for Transgender Health. “Some of these women have experienced constant, chronic trauma — trauma upon trauma. Yet what I also see in them is the most astounding resilience.”Many of Ms. Nimmons’s acquaintances have not beaten the odds. They have died in their 20s and 30s of illness, violence and suicide. So steeled was she to join them, in fact, that she had a running joke with friends that they had better get to her body before her mother did so she would not end up buried in a three-piece suit with a bow tie.Last year, after getting out of prison in Georgia, she was broken, physically and mentally, she said. She was jobless, all but homeless and in poor health; her T-cell count, a measure of her immune system’s strength, had fallen to a dangerously low level. She did not know how to save herself from becoming “extinct,” as she put it.Then her closest friend, a native New Yorker named Kahmel Gilliard, whom she had once taken under wing in South Carolina, offered a lifeline: “Come on up here to Brooklyn, baby,” he said. “This is a place that will help you take care of yourself, and you won’t have to do anything illegal to survive.”So last fall, Ms. Nimmons boarded a discount bus to New York City to start over in a place of greater tolerance and robust, high-quality services for people living with H.I.V. She had no idea that her effort to reboot her life would dovetail with the state’s effort to offer greater protection and care to transgender New Yorkers, as well as with a year of increasing visibility for transgender Americans.After a 13-hour bus ride, Ms. Nimmons disembarked in the bustle of Chinatown. She had $200 in her pocket and butterflies in her stomach.“I just looked up and I said, ‘Lord, whatever you have planned for me, let it be,’ ” she said. “And then I hailed a cab.”Five months later, Ms. Nimmons contacted a reporter at The New York Times. The Times had just published an article about a transgender inmate suing Georgia corrections officials, and Ms. Nimmons had crossed paths with the woman, Ashley Diamond, in a male prison.“Wow, wow, wow,” she said by way of greeting, her voice echoing through a speakerphone. “I just want to say I’m shocked that the world cares about the mistreatment of transgender women while incarcerated. Our story usually goes unnoticed and untold. People like me and Ashley — we live the reality, not the reality show.”A metronomic clicking followed, puzzling at the time. Later, over the eight months that The Times tracked her odyssey, it would become clear. Ms. Nimmons likes to punctuate her pronouncements by strumming her long, lacquered fingernails.It was spring, and Ms. Nimmons was feeling reborn. She introduced herself as a makeup artist and motivational speaker who was returning to school to become an undertaker. This description was more aspirational than true; she was getting a bit ahead of herself.But Ms. Nimmons had settled into New York with remarkable alacrity.Within weeks of arriving, she secured a spacious one-bedroom apartment on an eastern Brooklyn boulevard through the city’s H.I.V./AIDS Services Administration, and obtained food stamps. Those two things were crucial: “Once you’re not having to concentrate on whether you have a roof over your head or where your next meal is going to come from, it makes it easier to live healthy,” she said.In short order, she became a client of Amida Care, a Medicaid health plan that caters to people with H.I.V. and other chronic conditions. She started getting regular checkups and counseling at the Housing Works Community Healthcare center in East New York. Adhering faithfully to a new antiretroviral medication regimen, she saw her viral load drop and grew steadily stronger.Before long, she was able to contemplate the idea of a future, which meant becoming Kricket, legally and anatomically.For most of her adult life, Ms. Nimmons had lived first part time, then full time, as a woman, aided by hormone therapy, buttocks augmentation and double-D breast implants. But officially, she was still male, and, like most transgender people, she faced routine problems because of the incongruity between her gender presentation and her identity documents.“I’ve always been passable,” Ms. Nimmons said. “But then you hand over your license to a police officer, and you get the double take. Or worse.”In a sign of the times, transgender name-change clinics have become “a new trend in pro bono,” according to a news release from the American Bar Association. The Transgender Legal Defense and Education Fund, which has helped about 1,500 transgender people change their names, connected Ms. Nimmons with what she called “a fancy Park Avenue lawyer.”Ms. Nimmons chose Kricket mostly because it was her childhood nickname. She thought her mother, who had resisted calling her Meeka, would be more likely to use it, and her mother’s acceptance was pivotal to her. Also, Cricket, with a C, was a character she admired on “The Young and the Restless,” a blond model turned Legal Aid lawyer.“She was a force to be reckoned with, and she was beautiful,” she said.Preparing to go before a judge meant preparing to disclose her criminal history and declare it past. Over the spring, she became increasingly confident she could surface from a life underground.Until her last arrest in 2011, she had provided for herself by hustling, she said. Some hustles were legal, like her makeup jobs, and some were not, like forging checks and committing credit card fraud.“It was a life of crime,” Ms. Nimmons said. “Even though my harm was never physical to anybody else, I’m ashamed of what I did. But I did it to survive. It’s hard to live regular as a transgender woman, and transitioning is expensive.”Many in her world down South lived off the grid. It was what she called “the lifestyle” — a subculture of black gay and transgender people who embraced a glammed-up outlaw existence because society treated them as too transgressive to participate in the mainstream.They belonged to “gay families” — she had nine “gay kids,” she said — as well as to houses named after fashion designers. Hers was the House of Chanel in Atlanta, and she performed in drag pageants, dancing to Donna Summer’s hits.“Did you ever see the movie ‘Paris Is Burning’?” she asked, referring to the 1990 documentary about such houses in New York. “That was the lifestyle.”Shamari-René Cherry, her “little sister” and the founding mother of her house in Atlanta, said, “All the pretty girls were Chanel.“It was like a secret society,” she continued. “It was also a facade. In the light of day, you’re disowned by your real family, and you’re making illegal money. But at night, you’re a celebrity equivalent to Diana Ross or Whitney Houston.”Everybody looked after everybody else, pooling resources, which created bonds but also health risks. Those who were starting to transition shared hormones bought on the black market and gave one another injections. They also sought out illicit liquid silicone to enhance their hips, buttocks and sometimes breasts; on one occasion, Ms. Nimmons said, she almost died after an underground technician “stuck me wrong,” causing a pulmonary embolism.Opting “out of the game” in her move to New York, Ms. Nimmons was determined to get by on a monthly disability check of $722 — a third of which went toward her mostly city-paid rent — and a little extra cash from the occasional “face,” as she referred to her makeup jobs.She led a quiet, boring life, she said. With Mr. Gilliard as her frequent companion, she spent a lot of time in her bare-walled apartment, watching television talk shows, reality shows and nighttime soap operas.And, in a way that stirred her ambitions, she began to see her own experiences refracted through the prism of TV, with its new spotlight on transgender issues, characters and personalities.“Everybody’s getting on this transgender train now,” she said.It irked Ms. Nimmons that Caitlyn Jenner, who won an Olympic gold medal as Bruce, was getting so much attention for a transition in its infancy. In preacherly paragraphs, she vented about this, sometimes directly to Ms. Jenner’s image on the screen.“One thing you have on your side, Miss Caitlyn, is endless resources,” she said one day. “Most of us don’t. Most of us can’t transition physically in the snap of a finger. It takes years. It’s good you have accepted your truth. But what about all those transgender women who got killed, thrown off bridges, their throats slashed? What about the women who prostituted themselves, who got sick, who died? You don’t represent those girls.”Ms. Nimmons, though, does. And the associate medical director at her Housing Works health center bolstered her confidence to see herself that way.“You will definitely be a shining example for all the other ladies who are going through the same process,” Natacha Baron, a family nurse practitioner, told her at one appointment.“Yes, ma’am,” Ms. Nimmons responded. “Because after a point, you get to a point of saying that you’re not doing this for you anymore. It’s beyond you. Because there are a lot of trans individuals today that’s lost.”In late March, emboldened by the idea that her story might be part of a larger narrative, Ms. Nimmons reached out to her idol, Laverne Cox, the glamorous transgender actress and advocate.“Miss Cox,” she wrote in a private message on Facebook. “Just wanted to let you know because of you I decided to testify against the officer that raped me while I was incarcerated.”Ms. Nimmons had just returned from Atlanta, where she attended a federal court hearing to decide a lawsuit she had brought against the former officer, Duone Clark, who had sexually abused her in the Gwinnett County Detention Center.It was not the first time she had been abused by a guard. But it was the first time she reported such abuse and there were consequences — significant consequences that make hers “a rare and important case,” said Chase Strangio, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union.Transgender women in male institutions are known to be at far greater risk of sexual assault than other inmates. Federal rules now require that placement decisions for them be made case by case and not solely on the basis of genitalia. Isolating transgender inmates in “protective custody” is strongly discouraged.But, in the years before these rules were in place, Ms. Nimmons was assigned to male jails and prisons as a result of “my downstairs anatomy,” she said. Typically, she would be placed in a single cell, sometimes even locked down for 23 hours a day, supposedly for her own protection from other inmates. Nobody was protecting her from the guards, though.In late 2011, she let herself believe that Mr. Clark was her boyfriend and protector in the Gwinnett jailhouse.As if addressing him directly, she said in an interview, “I allowed you to fool me that you like me, you care for me, I was special.”She eventually learned she was not the only transgender detainee who was an object of his attentions. “I felt used like a fetish,” she said. “I felt dirty. I felt nasty. I felt belittled.”She confided in a new officer. And then, to her astonishment, Mr. Clark was not only dismissed but arrested.That almost never happens when transgender inmates complain of abuse. But Ms. Nimmons, as her lawyer, Jeffrey R. Sliz, said, was smart: “She pulled a Monica Lewinsky.”That is, she saved a pair of boxer shorts containing the officer’s semen, squirreling them away in her trash bin, because she knew she would not be believed without hard evidence. There were also, it turned out, videotapes showing Mr. Clark entering her cell and demanding and getting oral sex.Mr. Clark was ultimately sentenced to 10 years, three of them in prison, for sexual assault and dereliction of duty. His boss, the sheriff, denounced him as a “cockroach” in the local news media.At the hearing, Mr. Sliz, who was seeking a default judgment after Mr. Clark failed to respond to the lawsuit, was struck by Ms. Nimmons’s poise.“I was never as surprised, quite frankly, as to how — I don’t know if the word would be ‘elegant’ — how confident she was when she talked with the judge about how this sexual assault had affected her,” he said.Labeling Mr. Clark’s actions “reprehensible,” Judge William S. Duffey Jr. of United States District Court awarded Ms. Nimmons $200,000. Mr. Strangio of the A.C.L.U. said he was unaware of any other case in which a transgender person secured both a conviction and a high civil damage award against a guard.It was something of a symbolic victory, given that Mr. Clark is in prison and Mr. Sliz will have to negotiate a payment schedule with him on his release, knowing well that, as the judge said, “regrettably, there are probably not many resources there.”But Ms. Nimmons was not used to winning at all. So it made her feel empowered, as she told Ms. Cox in that Facebook message.“Because of you I was able to find closure and speak for all my transgender sisters that have lost their voice to violence,” she wrote.And then, to her delight, Ms. Cox responded: “I am so happy I have inspired you. We are a strong people. We are a resilient people. Sending lots and lots of love today. Stay in the love, Laverne.”Wearing a gray tank top that showed off her ample cleavage and form-fitting leggings tucked into gold-lamé sneakers, Ms. Nimmons stood at a fast-food counter in New York’s Pennsylvania Station one morning in late June.“Do I look fat?” she asked. “I think I’m going to go on that water, lemon and cayenne pepper diet. The Beyoncé diet.”She ordered a taco. “Today’s a big day,” she said.It was the day that Ms. Nimmons was heading to Philadelphia’s Main Line suburbs for her first appointment with the plastic surgeon who would perform her vaginoplasty. It also happened to be the day that same-sex marriage was legalized, and that President Obama was traveling to her home state for the funeral of the Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney, who had been killed in a mass shooting in a Charleston church.Ms. Nimmons conflated the personal and the political: “History is being made,” she said. “People said this day would never come for somebody like me, an African-American transgender woman without a lot of resources. It’s just like with the Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage. People said it would never happen. It’s just like with Obama. People said there’d never be a black president.”“So I guess people don’t really know,” she added.Throughout the train ride, she was reflective, gazing out at New Jersey. She stroked a tattoo on her right arm, a roughhewn image of hands clasped in prayer. She had had it inked in prison, to cover up the scars of a suicide attempt.“I never liked drama, but at that moment I felt I was going down,” she said. “Now I feel blessed.”Coming from a conservative Christian community, she had had Bible verses thrown at her often, and especially once she started revealing her surgical plans, she said. For instance, from Deuteronomy 23: “No man who has been castrated or whose penis has been cut off may be included among the Lord’s people.”She had, in fact, undergone an orchiectomy, or removal of the testes, a couple of months prior. She thought that it would be a good first step to take, and that it would have the positive effect of reducing her need for testosterone blockers and feminizing hormones if she went no further.But she still suffered from what one expert describes as “the cosmic toothache” that plagues people with severe, persistent gender dysphoria. (Gender dysphoria is the clinical term for the distress experienced by many, but not all, transgender people.) So the next step seemed obvious: a vaginoplasty over the summer.That did not mean her nerves were steady.Exiting the train in Philadelphia, she spoke by cellphone with Ms. Cherry, who is also a transgender woman.“I’m scared, Sha-Sha,” she told her, using her nickname.Ms. Cherry responded: “Man up, girl.”Strutting toward a taxi line, Ms. Nimmons threw back her head and laughed. Laughing with her, the dispatcher flirted. “If I’d known you was coming, I’d have ordered a limousine,” he said, ushering her into a car.The taxi pulled up to Rumer Cosmetic Surgery in a stately white Victorian house in the upscale town of Ardmore. Stepping into the hushed office and settling into a black leather chair, Ms. Nimmons whispered: “Wow. We ain’t in Brooklyn anymore.”The transgender movement has challenged society to break out of traditional ways of classifying gender, and to understand that gender identity does not always fit neatly into male and female boxes.Many transgender people do not desire to alter their genitals surgically. Like Ms. Cherry, who runs a skin care business in Atlanta, they live comfortably and successfully with hormone therapy and, in some cases, “top surgery.”But for those with severe, persistent gender dysphoria, gender reassignment surgery is “a medically necessary intervention to end lifelong suffering,” said Dr. Ettner, the Illinois psychologist, who co-edited “Principles of Transgender Medicine and Surgery.”In a recent federal hearing, Dr. Ettner and other experts testified that decades of research had confirmed the therapeutic value of such surgery, finding that most patients fared better psychologically, socially and economically afterward, and that regrets were rare.Yet until recently, the American health care system considered gender reassignment surgery to be elective, cosmetic or experimental. It was available only to those who could afford to pay privately — with many traveling abroad, especially to Thailand, for better deals — and most could not.A male-to-female vaginoplasty typically costs about $25,000, and female-to-male surgery, which is more complex, can cost four times that, specialists said. Over a quarter of transgender people, meanwhile, report income of less than $20,000 a year.In 2010, the National Transgender Discrimination Survey found that 23 percent of transgender women had had vaginoplasties; an additional 64 percent aspired to have one “someday.” (Female-to-male procedures were even rarer.)In recent years, however, “there has been a tectonic change in this field,” Dr. Ettner said.A third of Fortune 500 companies now offer transgender-inclusive health care benefits, up from zero in 2002, according to the Human Rights Campaign’s Corporate Equality Index for 2015. And public insurers and employers have started to follow suit.Medicare lifted its ban on gender reassignment surgery last year. The federal government ordered its insurance carriers to cover transition-related care for its employees. And nine state Medicaid programs have dropped their exclusions for transgender health care, with New York doing so this past March.Still, transgender people continue to grapple with denials of transition-related care even where coverage exists, and the skeletal network of providers is grappling to meet the mushrooming demand for service.Whereas Dr. Ettner’s medical team once went from hospital to hospital in Chicago “begging them to offer us facilities for these surgeries,” now “they are begging us,” she said.Dr. Loren Schechter, a surgical specialist who is Dr. Ettner’s colleague, estimated that no more than 10 surgeons nationwide perform vaginoplasties, and that fewer than six perform both male-to-female and female-to-male genital surgery, as he does. Demand for their services has skyrocketed; collectively, they will perform some 2,000 such operations this year, he said.This fall, Dr. Schechter moderated the first panel on reconstructive transgender surgery in the 89-year history of Plastic Surgery the Meeting, the annual conference of the profession.“The surgery is finally coming out of the shadows,” he said.Dressed in a white coat, green scrubs and silver clogs, Dr. Kathy Rumer welcomed Ms. Nimmons into an examination room.A former aerospace engineer who made a midlife career switch, Dr. Rumer said she had been exposed to transgender patients during her fellowship training, and came to empathize with them as a population underserved, even shunned, by medicine in the past.She started performing transition-related surgery a decade ago, and now does about 100 transgender “bottom surgeries” a year — as well as breast augmentation, chest masculinization and facial feminization.Most of her patients, like Ms. Nimmons, travel from out of town, and she rents rooms on her third floor — she lives on the second floor, above her office — to those who need a place to stay during the post-surgical recovery period.Ms. Nimmons was her first New York Medicaid patient.New York was caught flat-footed by the new demand for transgender medicine and surgery, though the Mount Sinai Health System is set to open a Center for Comprehensive Transgender Health this winter, and plans to bring in outside experts to operate and to train and proctor its surgical team.When the new rules took effect, however, Amida Care, like other health plans, had no providers who specialized in male-to-female vaginoplasties. So it executed a “single-case agreement” with Dr. Rumer for Ms. Nimmons. Though it counts some 400 transgender people among its 6,000 members, she was the first to request and be approved for gender reassignment surgery.In fact, by Oct. 1, New York Medicaid, which had paid for a total of 18 surgical procedures for people with gender dysphoria, had yet to pay for a single genital reconstruction.This is partly because many Medicaid clients, who just began getting medically supervised health care for their transition, are not yet equipped to document their gender dysphoria in order to qualify for surgery, should they want it.They need to have undergone hormone therapy for at least 12 continuous months, and to have lived full time in their gender identity during that period. They also need to furnish two referral letters from mental health professionals.During her journey to Philadelphia, Ms. Nimmons kept removing her letters from her purse and reading aloud the line, “It would be in Ms. Nimmons’s best interest to have G.R.S. to complete her transition process.” (G.R.S. refers to gender reassignment surgery.)“A lot of girls would kill to have these letters,” she said.Emerging from her examination by Dr. Rumer, Ms. Nimmons appeared somewhat stunned.“I’ve never had no lady look between my legs before,” she said.She had learned during her examination that she needed to push back her surgery until the fall so that her orchiectomy scars would be fully healed. This came as something of a relief, she said, because it would give her more time to be mentally prepared.In the taxi back to the train station, she talked loudly on her cellphone. “Yeah, the doctor said she needs my scrotum sac to be healed better from the castration before she does the sex change,” she said.The driver swiveled his head to look at his passenger, who batted her long false lashes, and he nearly drove off the road.Ms. Nimmons sounded uncharacteristically subdued when she answered her phone on a trip home to South Carolina a few weeks later.“I’m at peace that I have lived the life I was given to the best of my abilities,” she said when asked how she was doing. “I really don’t feel my work is done, but what has to be has to be.”She was in a hospital, ragingly ill with bacterial meningitis, and the fight had gone out of her. It did not help that she had just learned that a former boyfriend, in his 30s, had entered hospice care.“Christopher helped me pay for my top surgery,” she said, referring to her breast implants. “I call him the father of my twins.”She continued: “He’s been sick 15 years; I’ve been sick 24. He always had more problems, but sometimes, you know, because of my status, my immune system gets kind of compromised and weakened.”Ms. Nimmons learned she was H.I.V. positive at 16. It was the unfortunate legacy of her very first relationship, she said, with a man 17 years older than her who died last year, leaving her not knowing whether to feel sad or mad.She had accompanied a girlfriend who needed a pregnancy test to a clinic in her hometown, Orangeburg. While there, she decided on a whim to be tested for H.I.V. The health department sent workers to track her down at home or at school to deliver the bad news.“At 16, I didn’t know what to do with the information,” she said. “I kept it hidden for years.”She had had practice keeping her mouth shut. “You’re taught within the African-American family that you have to be quiet with certain things; certain things are not to be spoken of,” she said.As a child, she thought of herself as “a little boy named Jerome that was cute, that was adorable, that was very feminine.” Attitudes were far different in the rural South in the 1980s than they are now for “my little Jazz,” she said, referring affectionately to Jazz Jennings, the transgender girl in South Florida who has an accepting family and a reality show on TLC.Ms. Nimmons knew from about age 10 that she liked boys, and everybody else knew, too. She was routinely called “sissy,” assigned the role of cheerleader during neighborhood basketball games and denied entry to a local Boy Scout troop, she said.Still, nothing was said aloud inside her home, not even after she swallowed a bottle of Midol pills, the only thing she could find in the medicine cabinet, and landed in a psychiatric hospital under suicide watch.Sometime later, after an argument, a friend of hers put a photograph of Ms. Nimmons under the windshield wipers of her mother’s car. In the picture, Ms. Nimmons was wearing a dress, one of her mother’s. Infuriated, her mother threw the picture at her and then, she said, burned it and the dress in the backyard.Soon, she said, her mother kicked her out of the house and, not knowing about Ms. Nimmons’s diagnosis, tried to scare her by saying she would end up dead of AIDS if she did not quit being gay. Her mother came to regret the remark, “feeling like she marked me, so to say, or spoke it into existence,” Ms. Nimmons said.Ms. Nimmons moved in with a friend’s family, graduated from high school and left South Carolina for Atlanta. For a year, she studied mass communications at Clark Atlanta University. But her failure to seek treatment for H.I.V. caught up with her, and she became deathly ill with pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.“That was my saddest moment,” her mother, Mamie Johnson Nimmons, said. “Learning she was H.I.V. positive and that she was so sick, in and out of the hospital — she was supposed to be in college!”At that time, in the mid-1990s, a cocktail of new drugs was being used to treat people with H.I.V., and the antiretroviral therapy was proving highly effective.But Ms. Nimmons, on leaving a hospital, did not keep taking the pills.“Back home, the health care system treated us like freaks,” she said. “So you didn’t trust the system and you didn’t trust the medication and you were basically in denial.”Transgender women, and particularly black transgender women, are at especially high risk for H.I.V. infection. A meta-analysis of studies in 15 countries estimated that H.I.V. prevalence for transgender women was nearly 50 times as high as for other adults of reproductive age.“Many trans people, shut out by their families, the education system, the workplace and the health care system, end up not having choices around what they do to survive and to transition,” said JoAnne Keatley, the director of the Center of Excellence for Transgender Health at the University of California, San Francisco. “They resort to sex work. They resort to alcohol and drugs to cope. They have poor options in terms of sex partners.“Throw in racism on top of transphobia,” she continued, “and, for transgender women of color, it’s a perfect storm for the epidemic.”In New York City, 93 percent of transgender women with newly diagnosed H.I.V. over a recent five-year period were black or Hispanic, a study showed.Doug Wirth, the president of Amida Care, said he saw providing access to transgender health care as a key step toward ending the H.I.V./AIDS epidemic by 2020, which is a New York state goal. Helping those who are already H.I.V. positive become “virally suppressed” will in turn help bring down “unacceptably high rates of new H.I.V. infection among people of trans experience,” he said.Ms. Nimmons agrees. But was it too late for her, she wondered in July, lying in the hospital bed where she had spent the previous 10 days?“I wanted to thank you,” she told a reporter on the phone. “I know whatever happens to me, you will be my storyteller.”In August, Ms. Nimmons met a man, a much younger man, who wanted to take her out on a date. “I guess I’m a cougar,” she said.Fully recovered from illness, she was preparing to lie low until her surgery. She was avoiding the subway to keep her exposure to infection at a minimum, and avoiding relationships because she was in limbo. So the timing was not great.“I made up some excuse like my boyfriend and I just got back together,” she said. “I took his number, put it in my Bible, and I’ll wait until December, I guess.”At a checkup at Housing Works, she repeated the story to her nurse, Ms. Baron, adding details. The guy was a professional boxer, 6-foot-7. She held her hands a foot apart to demonstrate the size of his feet, and laughed suggestively.“Maybe you won’t want somebody with ‘feet’ that big for quite a while,” Ms. Baron said.Relationships are tricky for transgender women, Ms. Nimmons said. “You have to figure out when to disclose,” she said. “Sometimes, you disclose, they get upset. Sometimes, you disclose, they like it too much, and you get upset. You’re dealing with a no-win situation until you have that completion.”She had a frightening experience in the spring. She invited a man to her apartment, making it clear beforehand that there would be no sex. “He thought otherwise,” she said, “and there was a struggle. The lady downstairs started banging on her ceiling. It scared him. He ran off. And I went into a deep hole for like three days.“My biggest fear,” she said, a short time after that encounter, “is having my friends come and find me dead. That’s one thing Bruce/Caitlyn will never feel. But that’s the life of a transgender woman in today’s society. Not sitting in front of a camera getting paid $100,000 to tell your story.”Before being cleared for surgery, Ms. Nimmons would have to be in good health, but her vitals and immune system appeared to have already bounced back.“She’s going to want to see your numbers,” Ms. Baron said, about Dr. Rumer.Ms Nimmons responded: “She didn’t even blink an eye at the H.I.V. She said it would be discrimination” to do so.While she was in the grip of meningitis, Ms. Nimmons had to miss the long-awaited court date for her name-change hearing. To the surprise of her lawyers, however, the judge simply approved the change in her absence. Ms. Nimmons had looked forward to making a public declaration in an open courtroom that she was transgender (and proud). So it was anticlimactic — but a relief.September passed slowly. Ms. Nimmons went through a period of the blues, during which she ate cake and ice cream and cried. She went through a stage of considerable anxiety about the vaginoplasty itself, provoked by obsessive watching of graphic YouTube videos about the surgery. She asked friends, and acquaintances, if she was doing the right thing.And finally, as the date approached, she let that all go. At the Housing Works clinic, she found herself the center of attention, and proud of it. “If you could have seen the looks on the girls’ faces of — of hope,” she said.In a stunning turnabout for their complicated relationship, Ms. Nimmons’s mother, who still lives in Orangeburg, had volunteered to accompany her to Philadelphia for the surgery.Over the last few years, as society had changed, her mother had, too. “It has been a process,” her mother said. “In the end, you can’t discriminate against your own child. You either get on the bandwagon or you get off.”Ms. Nimmons’s mother had originally intended to go to Las Vegas in the fall to celebrate her 60th birthday. “But I guess I’m going to have to put that on hold,” she said before her flight to New York. “Kricket needs me in her corner, and that’s my child.”Preparing to board a train to Philadelphia the day before her surgery, Ms. Nimmons was mortified that the ticket to her future was under the name Jerome.“Really?” she said of the ticket, which had been issued before her name change was official. “We’re going to have a burning ceremony to get rid of that ticket with that name on it.”Over the summer, she had changed her hairstyle from a flirty bob with bangs to a regal weave, with long, thick braids. She was dressed practically in jeans and a sweatshirt, no nail or eyelash extensions, cubic zirconia studs in her ears. Her usual torrent of words had tightened to near haiku.“Well, it’s come down to the wire,” she said. “One day left. Feelings are real. Very emotional.”Once aboard, she snuggled up to her mother. Grumpy about having cameras in her face, her mother looked away, out the window. She was tired, having been unsuccessful in finding any Mello Yello, her caffeinated drink of choice, in New York. And she was worried about rising floodwaters near her home in South Carolina.Ms. Nimmons, unfazed by her mother’s unresponsiveness, lifted her head from her shoulder. “And we’re off,” she said as the train started rolling.Her mother took a power nap. When she woke up, she confiscated some hard candies from Ms. Nimmons, who was supposed to be fasting.“I don’t want to hear the whining,” her mother said, “and you know you will whine.”Ms. Nimmons swiveled her head, taken aback: “I’m supposed to!”Her mother disagreed. “It’s what you wanted, so, sweetie, you got to put on your big-girl drawers and do it.”Ms. Nimmons told her mother that, given the nature of the surgery, she had not brought along drawers but rather adult diapers.“Well, put on your big-girl Depends then,” her mother said.Once in Ardmore, as Ms. Nimmons approached the front door of Rumer Cosmetic Surgery, an African-American transgender man walked out. They eyed each other.“Hey, do I pass?” the man said, smiling.Ms. Nimmons flashed him a big grin. “We knew each other,” she said later. “Not personally. We just had a moment of understanding.”She and her mother settled into their room on the third floor, with its sloped ceiling and its stuffed red heart above the bed.Starting a preparation for the surgery, Ms. Nimmons wincingly drank a liquid mixture. Suddenly overcome by nerves, she started misplacing things — her phone, her pills.Unpacking, her mother got furious that Ms. Nimmons had brought along bags of snack food. “Just so you know, fat girls ain’t sexy,” she said.Head bowed, Ms. Nimmons left the room for her presurgical appointment.Later, turning in for the evening, she quoted a psalm: “Weeping may last through the night, but joy comes in the morning.”Before sunrise on Oct. 6, in a presurgical unit at Delaware County Memorial Hospital, Ms. Nimmons listened to gospel music through earbuds, then switched to the Christian Broadcasting Network on television and finally settled on a rerun of “I Love Lucy.”She was contemplative, shaking her head. “Little old me coming from a country town of South Carolina — Orangeburg, S.C. — is about to have G.R.S.,” she said. “Wow.”Overcome with emotion, she dabbed her eyes with paper towels. She said she was not thinking about surgical complications, but about life after the surgery, especially about the possibility of a real relationship.“You think about not having to disclose, but then you still have a history,” she said. “So there are still complications. But you think about how happy you will be. You’ll get someone who accepts you for you — mind, body and soul. Because in this world of transgenderalism, it’s hard. You know, they call us the transformers, the fembots. It’s hard for a transformer out there.”In an armchair beside her, her mother urged her one last time to be certain that she wanted to proceed with the irreversible surgery.“Mama!” she said. “How many times have you said that?”Her mother answered: “Fifty. And I’m going to say it 51 until you get your ass up in those stirrups.”Ms. Nimmons laughed, but with exasperation: “So you’re saying when I get finished I’m going to say, ‘Lord, please let me just go back’?”Her mother said yes.“No, I ain’t going to ask for it back!” she said, rolling her eyes. “They can have it. She can just take it and put it in a jar. Just sit it up on a shelf.”After a short period of silence, her mother said, “You’re going to have fun telling your daddy this.”It was moments before brakes-up on the gurney. Ms. Nimmons was stunned. “I thought you told him,” she said. “You picked a fine time to tell me you didn’t.”Revealing the nerves beneath her gruffness, her mother started crying as Ms. Nimmons was wheeled out of the room.As she rolled down the hallway, Ms. Nimmons covered her mouth with her hand and stared upward. Saying a silent prayer (whose content she later divulged), she asked God to forgive her sins and let his will be done. Tears leaked from the corners of her eyes as she disappeared, purple paw socks first, into the restricted area that held the operating room.The most common technique for a vaginoplasty is called a penile inversion. “Basically, the penis is disassembled, and its component parts are used to create the female anatomy,” Dr. Schechter said. The surgery gives patients a “neovagina,” clitoris and labia.Ms. Nimmons’s transformation took under four hours. Afterward, her mother spoke to Dr. Rumer. “The doctor said it went very well; he came through it fine,” she said, visibly relieved, though inadvertently using the male pronoun.The next morning, propped up in a hospital bed with a white-ruffled black shower cap on her head, Ms. Nimmons was surprisingly alert and eager to hold forth. “Crank it up,” she said to a videographer present.“I want to say: Never give up on your dreams,” the long soliloquy began.She effused gratitude for the doctor and nurses; her baby-faced best friend, Mr. Gilliard, who had taken a bus from New York to be by her side; and her mother: “To have her here with me is unthinkable,” she said. “Even though she done wrong in the beginning, she’s making it right in the end.”On the news that morning, she had been stunned to learn that hours before she went into surgery, a young black transgender woman named Kiesha Jenkins had been beaten, shot in the back and killed by a group of men in nearby Philadelphia.“Some of us don’t make it,” she said. “I was given an opportunity, and I’m going to ride it until the wheels fall off.”When all was said and done, who would Kricket Jerná Nimmons be?She possessed a clear vision before the surgery. She would blossom into “a real grown Southern lady.” She would blend into “straight” society, fall in love with a man who respected her, and pursue a career as an undertaker, putting crime and government assistance behind her.She would adopt a new, sophisticated look, kind of “Olivia Pope-ish,” in emulation of the lead character on “Scandal.” She would wear refined knit suits, like those made by the luxury brand St. John. She would be wasp-waisted and voluptuous.But a butterfly does not emerge from its cocoon overnight, she said.It took six weeks of near-hibernation in Brooklyn for Ms. Nimmons to recuperate sufficiently to venture forth into the world.Perhaps her first outing should not have been to Orangeburg. It was Thanksgiving time, however, and she longed to sit beneath the towering red pines, absorb the quiet and sip sweet iced tea. She missed her nieces and nephew, who accept her unconditionally, and her toy poodle, Lady, who has ears dyed pink.It was home. Or was it?“You still feel like an outcast,” she said, settling into a plastic chair outside her parents’ house because she was not allowed to take her visitors inside. “It falls into the category of — where do I belong?”Until news of her uncle’s impending death sidetracked their issues, she and her mother, and she and her brother, had been feuding. She had finally told her taciturn father about the surgery — obliquely: “I said, ‘I changed a big part of me’ ” — and he had responded with silence.Her friend Christopher, the one who had been in hospice care, had died shortly before her return — “the last of a dying breed,” she said. She felt his absence keenly, one less relationship tethering her to South Carolina.She contemplated cutting her trip short as she navigated the divide between her old and new worlds. Her hometown friends implored her to accompany them to a “leather and lace party” at a gay club in the state capital, for instance, but hadn’t she given up that lifestyle? she asked herself, even as she slipped her feet into black lace-up shoes with five-and-a-half-inch heels.Going forward, would she label herself a “heterosexual woman”? Would she — she did not know what to foresee — join a book club? Have “coffee shop dates”?Shortly before her surgery, she had unexpectedly fallen into a relationship with a 24-year-old transgender man who, as Ms. Nimmons characterized it, was “still biologically female.” This confused her.“I’ve never had a liking to women my whole life, but he’s special,” she said.Might she continue to identify as a transgender woman? It was an identity that suddenly presented her with opportunities.On her calendar for December were two — the shooting of an educational video for the Transgender Legal Defense and Education Fund and a role, potentially, in a scripted web series called “Eden’s Garden,” which focuses on black and Latino transgender men in New York City.She went ahead with the video, enjoying the chance to be an advocate for transgender rights as well as to be surrounded by cameras. But then she suffered a setback, physically and emotionally.After an unexpected return to Dr. Rumer’s office on Tuesday, she learned she would need revisionary surgery, which the doctor said happens with patients who do not follow postoperative instructions. Ms. Nimmons spent that night tossing and turning, and crying. The next morning, she posted this thought on her Facebook page:“Yesterday was a very trying day for me on the new journey that God has placed in my life. We ask God for a lot of things and with faith we sit and wait. But I have to say, be careful of what u ask for because you just might get it.”By Wednesday evening, she had absorbed the disappointment of what will now be a protracted period of transition, given that the corrective surgery will not be done until next year. She determined to “hold my head up high” and fight the oscillations in mood that plague her as she puzzles over a fundamental question.“Who am I now?” she asked.An article last Sunday about the gender change of Kricket Nimmons misstated the university affiliation for the Center of Excellence for Transgender Health, which is led by JoAnne Keatley, who commented on the struggles of transgender individuals. The center is at the University of California, San Francisco — not at the University of San Francisco.Advertisement