https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/13/opinion/sunday/mark-bittman-a-farewell.html
Opinion | A Farewell - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1790
AdvertisementSupported byBy Mark BittmanTHIS is my last regular opinion column on food for The Times. I’m leaving to take a central role in a year-old food company, to do what I’ve been writing about these many years: to make it easier for people to eat more plants. (“Oh,” say my friends, “you move to California and join a start-up.” Yup. Corny as can be.) I see it as putting philosophy into action and will talk about details soon.Between time pressures and potential conflicts of interest (you shouldn’t pitch a venture capitalist and write about a company he’s funded the following week), I can’t do both. Even if I could, the choice wasn’t that difficult, and in many ways this column has run its course.When I began, nearly five years ago, food was not generally considered as serious a topic as it is now. When I met with Andrew Rosenthal, The Times’s editorial page editor, he asked if there were enough food issues to sustain a weekly column. I laughed and promised him a list of 75 ideas the next morning. I underdelivered by a couple of dozen, but I still gave him 50; both of us are happy it worked out.The time is right to stop. I’ve raised the topics I thought I should; I made the best arguments around those subjects where I was capable; I threw my heart and energy into it; and to a large extent have said what I had to say.I’ve long seen myself as an activist and an advocate as well as a journalist. Although I’m eager to understand both sides of an argument, I’ve felt that my job was to parse an issue, get the facts right, figure out what I thought was the correct position on that issue, and express it.Mostly I believe that I’ve identified the major issues facing us in the interwoven worlds of food, agriculture, nutrition and the environment. (Not that I was first, not by a long shot.) Unless I’m not reading enough, there don’t seem to be any new significant issues surfacing, just the same intransigent themes that I’m going to try to take on directly as an entrepreneur.Now, nearly everyone knows that food matters. If you see food only as food, if you think of food only as pleasure, your head is in the sand. Food affects just about everything, and vice versa. The increasing awareness of this has led to big changes at the intersection of food and news and opinion. When I began, there were a few people writing seriously about food online and in print; I knew most if not all of them. Our positions were often similar, but to speak in The Times gave the ideas broader exposure. And indeed, what I’ve written has been, generally speaking, valued beyond my dreams.The world of food writing has changed. Dozens if not scores of writers are expressing opinions about food, often daily. That, combined with the competition to be distinctive, leads to tremendous pressures that sometimes result in hasty, often exaggerated positions along with ridiculous stances, like expressing disdain for salads or arguing that increasing the minimum wage for food workers is harmful.There is also increasing pressure from audiences to propose “solutions,” but the problems are so fundamental that I often felt I should be writing about abolishing the Senate as a first step toward reducing the hegemony of monoculture.I’m gratified that real progress has been made on two issues that I honestly did not have much hope for. One is labor: To a large extent the fight for $15 is about food workers. That it’s spread to the wider work force is not only a victory but evidence that food struggles are representative and important. It’s also fulfilling to see that the fledgling food movement has at long last recognized that the fair treatment of workers — and not just animals — is a food issue.AND, although I’ve generally been disappointed in the Obama administration’s positions on food, the Obamas deserve credit for making the school lunch program far better.I’ve been surprised by the lack of progress in other areas. I would have bet that we’d have gotten antibiotics out of the food supply by now, because the downside of their abuse is so clear. That hasn’t happened, largely through a lack of conviction on the part of the Obama administration (no industry is going to voluntarily stop using an ingredient if it believes it benefits its business).I’m sorry, too, that more progress hasn’t been made in reducing the marketing of junk food to kids and on limiting the ease with which children can buy soda. Issues such as these should be at the forefront of a national policy for food and health. A president with true vision and commitment to the nation’s future would make it so.Needless to say, I could go on here. But it’s time to hang ’em up. Just after I started this column, I promised my editors that I wouldn’t overstay my welcome, that five years represented a sensible amount of time to rail against the injustices and praise the advances I was seeing in the world of food and things linked to it.Other arenas are calling me, and other people can and will carry the torch in the food world. I’ll support them as best I can. And when it seems compelling, I’ll get my voice out there.Please join me on Facebook or follow me on Twitter. Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. Advertisement