https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/12/dining/what-to-cook-this-weekend.html
What to Cook This Weekend - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
78
AdvertisementSupported byWhat to CookBy Sam SiftonGood morning. There’s something exciting about a stack of new cookbooks. It’s the promise of them, maybe, the sense of possibility, the way you can turn a page and discover something new and exciting and rare, receive instructions that really could change your life.This week, my colleagues on the food desk of The Times have turned their attention to what we think are the 12 best cookbooks of the spring publishing season, a shelf of beauties that deliver stories and recipes from all over the world. There are recipes to go along with our exploration of the prose, and I’m hoping you’ll spend some time this weekend cooking from them.Of particular interest to me, and perhaps to others who are fans of her reporting for The Times, are the family recipes of Priya Krishna, who wrote “Indian-ish” alongside her mother, Ritu Krishna. And so: garlic ginger chicken with cilantro and mint (above); tomato rice with crisp Cheddar; Indian-ish baked potatoes. These are not recipes for Indian food in the sense of food from the vast, regionally diverse nation of India. Instead, they’re recipes for Indian food made by a self-taught cook of Indian descent, raising her mostly vegetarian family in Dallas, in the here and now. Authenticity’s for saps. Priya’s mom’s recipes are delicious.Not all our new recipes this week come from cookbooks, of course. Joan Nathan brought us a fine one for prepared horseradish, which you could make this weekend in advance of Passover; refrigerated, it will keep for a very long time. Use some of it, though, to make salmon with potatoes and a horseradish-tarragon sauce for dinner on Saturday night. Yowza.Then: drop biscuits and jam for Sunday breakfast, and a huge fried-eggplant sandwich for lunch. Pasta primavera for dinner and a promise that next week, all week, you’ll eat salads and soup.There are thousands more recipes to cook this weekend on NYT Cooking. (You need a subscription to access them. I need you to take out that subscription. It keeps me employed!) You might need recipes for these 13 dessert bars you can eat with one hand. You might want to learn how to use an Instant Pot. You may need Passover recipes. You may need ones for Easter.Check us out on Instagram, as well, and on Twitter and Facebook. (I’m out there, too.) And do get in touch if you run into trouble with your cooking, or our technology. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com, and we fashion ourselves after this guy Delacroix painted back in 1849.Now, how are you fixed for weekend reads? I think you should take up John Seabrook in The New Yorker, on strawberry farming and the rise of robot pickers.It doesn’t have anything to do with mirepoix or sushi rice, but I sure hope you’ll be buying and reading my pal Erin Lee Carr’s memoir, “All That You Leave Behind.” It’s heartbreaking and very, very good.Kat Kinsman recently sent me down a David Hasselhoff rabbit hole, where I discovered that on his new album he’s covering — I swear to you — “Head On,” by the Jesus and Mary Chain.Finally, while some of the tips are less brilliant than others, Field & Stream’s top 25 lifesaving survival skills are still worth browsing in advance of the spring and summer adventure season. (I added duct tape and a disposable lighter to the bug-out bag, myself.) Get outside tomorrow, amid all the cooking. See you on Sunday!cookingcookingAdvertisement