https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/26/opinion/letters/climate-trump.html
Opinion | Another Bleak Climate Report, Shrugged Off by Trump - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1003
AdvertisementSupported bylettersOne reader calls the president’s refusal to address climate change “as befuddling as it is inexcusable.” Readers also discuss efforts to eliminate coal as an energy source.To the Editor:Re “U.S. Climate Study Has Grim Warnings of Economic Risks” (front page, Nov. 24):We have been warned. If the status quo continues, the ravages of climate change will be devastating. Tens of thousands of Americans will die prematurely and the economic costs will weaken the country, according to the government’s own analysis.In the first two years of Donald Trump’s presidency, we have disengaged from the global Paris climate accord, and the Environmental Protection Agency, under the president’s direction, has rolled back gains the Obama administration had made in taking measures to reduce the greenhouse gases that are the culprit in this man-made calamity we now face. Tragically, over the past two years we have lost over 3,000 Americans to violent hurricanes and wildfires, events that are predicted to increase in volatility if we do nothing. The verdict is in. Climate change is here and it is now, Mr. President. You are abdicating your responsibility to protect the citizens and the country that you serve, and it is as befuddling as it is inexcusable.Felicia MassarskyAtlantic CityTo the Editor:Perhaps now that the effects of climate change have been presented in dollars and cents, some of those who have the most power to make the needed changes will take some action. I am not very hopeful, however, as short-term gain has almost always eclipsed long-term vision. Helen OgdenPacific Grove, Calif.To the Editor:Re “Coal Endangers a Planet Unable to Stop Using It” (front page, Nov. 25):Elimination of coal as an energy source requires its replacement. But with what? Natural gas is often portrayed as cleaner, but two-thirds of United States natural gas comes from fracking, a method with still-to-be-determined risks to water supplies. Wind and solar are not robust without massive battery installations and their attendant environmental risks. Fukushima and Chernobyl demonstrated the risks of nuclear power.Simplistic statements about the world needing to quit coal must be avoided when proposing global-scale technology changes, since we are never guaranteed that our solutions won’t be worse than the problems they are designed to solve.John Richard SaylorClemson, S.C. The writer is a professor of mechanical engineering at Clemson University.To the Editor:Your article casts a light on the complex web of reasons for coal’s formidable staying power. But even the most political and communal-sounding explanations all ultimately find themselves grounded in the mighty dollar. If it cost companies worldwide more to mine coal than they could make selling its energy, coal would not be burned, simple as that.In truth, that cost is there, but it is distributed across the entire world. A price on emitting — a carbon tax — would change that paradigm by signaling to businesses that they should produce coal only so long as they can proffer more dollars’ worth of benefit than cost to society by doing so.Coupled with a tariff at the border applied only to countries without carbon prices, the United States’ not-inconsiderable economic might would forcefully incentivize similar policies globally. Check out the Citizens’ Climate Lobby’s carbon fee and dividend as one exemplary policy.Daniel PalkenBoulder, Colo.The writer is a research assistant in physics at the University of Colorado, Boulder.Advertisement