https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/01/nyregion/readers-responses-to-a-womans-journey-living-with-alzheimers.html
Readers’ Responses to a Woman’s Journey Living With Alzheimer’s - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1099
AdvertisementSupported byBy Amy ZerbaMore than five million Americans are believed to have Alzheimer’s, a majority of whom are 65 and older. The wicked disease slowly robs individuals of their memories as family members and friends try desperately to understand their loved ones’ behavior and emotions.That journey and shared experience was repeated in readers’ comments to a New York Times article about Geri Taylor, a 72-year-old woman with Alzheimer’s who is learning to adjust to her worsening condition. Ms. Taylor opened up to The Times’s N. R. Kleinfield over a span of 20 months about her frustrations, as well as moments of joy, living with Alzheimer’s.Most readers who responded to the article about Ms. Taylor shared their personal connections with the debilitating disease. There were those who provided caregiving tips and others who demanded that more research be conducted about Alzheimer’s and that more attention be given to it.A selection of the comments:“I notice that I lose names, sometimes names that I have mentioned in conversation just moments ago. And it isn’t so much the loss, I can usually come up with a suitable pronoun, but it is the discouraging feeling that the name lies just on the far side of a tiny membrane but could be deep in space in terms of its availability. It sometimes comes back to me within seconds, sometimes minutes, occasionally hours but, so far, always. On the other hand I can always tell you that I lost a spelling bee to Juanita Meyers in the fifth grade; the word was ‘necessary,’ I misspelled it with two c’s.”— John David Burgener, 68, Trenton“One day, I asked my mother if she ever wondered why I called her ‘Mom.’ She hadn’t called me anything except ‘you’ during those five years. She looked at me with the kindness in her eyes that Alzheimer’s never robbed her of and said, ‘Well, I didn’t want to say anything to hurt your feelings so I just go along with it, thinking you are confused or lonely. But you’re a very nice girl.’ (I was 54 years old.) Funny, in that heartbreaking way, it still makes me smile and cry at the same time, nearly a decade after her passing.”— Janice Vallely, 63, Austin, Tex.“My very intelligent aunt realized that she was in early-stage Alzheimer’s at around age 80 and said, ‘I won’t remember one word of this conversation but I love talking to you.’ So we talked as long as she was able. She lived to be 100 years old and I think she had wonderful communication in a world we do not see and understand. Hope so.”— Nancy Gleason, 66, Des Moines“My husband had Alzheimer’s. He died two years ago. One of his first symptoms was not being able to find things. People with Alzheimer’s no longer have short-term memory. They are not able to retrace their steps. When he would lose something, I would think, when did I last see him with it? When did he last use it? Then I would retrace his steps and find it. He would say, ‘How did you do that!’”— Marcie Martelli, 74, The Villages, Fla.“The Taylors are lucky to have supportive family and friends, and the financial resources, to live out this disease with so much grace. I wish them the best. My working-class parents were definitely not as fortunate. This disease ravaged their golden years. The sadness and helplessness I continue to feel are almost unbearable.”— Jeanette McVicker, 56, Fredonia, N.Y.“I moved my mother into a high-rise apartment a few blocks away from where I lived and arranged 24-hour day care for her. One day, one of her caretakers called and said she had a sudden emergency and had to leave. By the time I got to my mother’s apartment 10 minutes later, she had set the fire alarm off and the firemen were already pulling hoses off their trucks. The firemen pretended not to notice when I started crying.”— Roy Stanton, 75, Dallas“Be compassionate. Be patient. Don’t yell. Yelling does not help.”— Peter Melzer, 61, Charlottesville, Va.“If your loved one is suffering from this terrible disease, do everything you can to spend more time with him or her. One sees an improving effect on the sufferer with greater proximity to family members and their interactions.”— Michael J. Keegan, 56, Hammond, Ind.“The thought that I, or a family member, could someday be diagnosed with Alzheimer’s fills me with infinitely more dread than the idea that a terrorist may blow up the plane I am traveling in. This is the war on terror that the federal government should be pouring billions and billions of dollars into.”— Richard Surwilo, 63, Tulsa, Okla.“My mother was recently diagnosed with Alzheimer’s. She is in her late 50s. Her mother died of dementia in her early 80s. Like cancer, you just don’t get it until your personal life is shattered by the diagnosis. For the love of God, we as a nation must spend the money to find the cure for this before it’s too late. There are no excuses.”— Eric Gilmore, 22, BostonAdvertisement