https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/29/dining/four-seasons-restaurant-is-headed-for-new-space-on-park-ave.html
Four Seasons Restaurant Is Headed for New Space on Park Ave. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2302
AdvertisementSupported byBy Florence FabricantFor a few months the rumor has been flying around dining and social circles that the venerable Four Seasons restaurant would move to 280 Park Avenue, between East 48th and 49th Streets. A 15-year lease for 20,000 square feet of space in that office tower, which was recently renovated, was signed on Thursday.The restaurant is relocating because Aby Rosen, the owner of 375 Park Avenue at 52nd Street, known as the Seagram Building, where the world-famous restaurant has operated since its founding in 1959, would not renew its lease. The restaurant is owned by Julian Niccolini, Alex von Bidder and members of the Bronfman family.It will close after dinner service on July 16 and when it moves, it will take the Four Seasons name with it. The owners have trademarked it and the logo of the four seasonal trees.With the guidance of Paul Goldberger, an architecture critic, Mr. Niccolini and Mr. von Bidder have selected Isay Weinfeld, a Brazilian architect, to design the space. He will also be responsible for creating the furnishings, tableware and serving gear, and he plans to enlist artists to participate.Like the original, the new restaurant will consist of two dining rooms, one on each side of the office tower at street level. The Four Seasons is known for its Grill Room, a clubby lunchtime magnet for powerful business types with regular customers like Henry Kissinger, the businessman Leonard Lauder and the developer Harry Macklowe. The more formal Pool Room is so named for its centerpiece, a bubbling white marble pool.Whether these rooms will be replicated in some way in the new space remains to be seen. “It’s up to the architect,” Mr. Niccolini said on Saturday. “He will determine that; we really don’t know.”The original Four Seasons, whose interior of French walnut paneling has New York City landmark status, was designed by Philip Johnson. “Our new architect will be like another Philip Johnson, but for this new century,” Mr. Niccolini said.In addition to the two dining rooms, there will be outdoor dining spaces for each. “That’s really an exciting part,” he said. A private dining room will be installed on the second floor. Demolition and construction are to begin next week, and the new restaurant complex is targeting late 2017 for its reopening.In the meantime, Mr. Niccolini said he and Mr. von Bidder had been talking to other restaurants nearby to create short-term pop-ups. They are even considering having a Four Seasons food truck to sell classics like the crab cakes.The space that the restaurant will vacate will be taken over by Major Food Group, which owns downtown restaurants like Carbone, Santina and Dirty French. Jeff Zalaznick and the chefs Mario Carbone and Rich Torrisi, the partners in Major Food, are planning a modern seafood restaurant in what is now the Pool Room, and they expect pay homage to the Four Seasons by serving vintage dishes in the Grill Room. The new restaurant is to open at the end of the year but as yet does not have a name.Advertisement