https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/01/opinion/letters/joe-biden-sexual-harassment.html
Opinion | Lessons From a Complaint Against Joe Biden - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
92
AdvertisementSupported bylettersReaders react to a female politician’s charge that Mr. Biden, who was then vice president, touched and kissed her inappropriately.To the Editor:Re “Biden Strives to Stem Crisis Over Touching” (front page, April 1):We are missing a genuine opportunity to have an open conversation about what change looks like as it relates to the treatment of women. Instead, we are unable to hold two truths at once.Men were acculturated to behave in ways that ignored the sensibilities of women, and that is no longer acceptable.I appreciate that Lucy Flores, the former Nevada legislator who has accused former Vice President Joe Biden of kissing and touching her, is taking this opportunity to speak about her experience, and I simultaneously struggle to understand how it is helpful to render men like Mr. Biden “unfit” because of behaviors that were so deeply woven into the social fabric of this country that we are only now beginning to address them contextually.Real change demands that we reach a place of understanding for what it is to be in the shoes of the other and move in a direction that honors all.Laura PetifordFairfield, Conn.To the Editor:In acknowledging “expressions of affection” during his years on the campaign trail, and saying “not once — never — did I believe I acted inappropriately,” Joe Biden echoes assumptions long protected in our culture. It’s past time that men in power are held accountable for actions that range from creepy to criminal. This story focuses on how men who are accused justify what they’ve done and how their dreams are in jeopardy. Thank you to women like Lucy Flores who feel empowered to speak up. It’s helping change the narrative from men’s privileges and how they may be lost to focus on how women in the workplace endure insults and assaults in order to keep their jobs, provide for their families and advance their careers.Barbara EllsonEvanston, Ill.To the Editor:Joe Biden is of a generation of men who inappropriately touch and kiss women they don’t know. And he has to stop doing that. We must of course respect and believe the woman who has accused Mr. Biden of inappropriate behavior. But can we please do so without jumping to political excommunication as the knee-jerk penalty?Stanton W. GreenWest Long Branch, N.J.To the Editor:When I was at a restaurant in Wilmington, Del., last week with three other people, Joe Biden stopped by our table to talk. It was a pleasant conversation, and the whole time he was talking to us, his hand was on my shoulder.I figured that he was a touchy guy, nothing more. Sometimes we need to relax.Susannah SardBronxville, N.Y.To the Editor:O.K., I get it. Touching someone you hardly know on the shoulders and kissing her on the head is annoying and inappropriate. But disqualifying? In a race where the ultimate opponent will be a man who bragged that he could grab women whenever he wanted to, on a body part that was not the shoulders?Joe Biden has plenty to answer for, especially his treatment of Anita Hill. Let his challengers question him on that, rather than being distracted by the media frenzy of the day.Eileen WestPleasantville, N.Y.To the Editor:Admittedly, Joe Biden can be, on occasion, effusive in his interactions. That is part of his engaging personality. In my 15 years as a county legislator in Delaware, working and campaigning with Mr. Biden, I found him always kind, helpful and proper in his relationship with me, the women on his staff and the constituents he met. He never showed any chauvinist tendencies and was an active and vocal supporter of women’s rights. I have always respected him and valued his integrity. We would be fortunate to have Joe Biden as our next president.Karen VenezkyParisTo the Editor:Yet again the proverbial liberal circular firing squad. Don’t Lucy Flores and others get it? The enemy is Donald Trump.Richard BrandshaftVancouver, Wash.Advertisement