https://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/27/us/dzhokar-tsarnaev-moved-to-medical-detention-center.html
Dzhokar Tsarnaev Moved to Medical Detention Center - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2363
AdvertisementSupported byBy Serge F. Kovaleski, William K. Rashbaum and Timothy WilliamsBOSTON — Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the man charged with setting off explosives that killed three people and wounded more than 260 others at the Boston Marathon, has been moved from a hospital to a federal medical detention center as he continues to recover from injuries suffered during his effort to escape arrest in the days after the bombing, the authorities said on Friday.Mr. Tsarnaev, 19, was transferred from Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston to a locked medical facility for male prisoners at Fort Devens, about 40 miles west the city, according to a statement from the United States Marshals Service.Mr. Tsarnaev, who was involved in a shootout with the police after the April 15 bombing, has possible gunshot wounds to the “head, neck, legs and hand,” according to court records. He has been charged with using a weapon of mass destruction, and if convicted at trial, faces the death penalty or life in prison.On Thursday, the search for evidence in the bombing inquiry sent white-suited investigators combing through garbage at a landfill in New Bedford, Mass., as they hunted for a laptop computer belonging to one of the brothers, a law enforcement official said.Investigators believe that the computer may have been thrown out, and they searched the Crapo Hill Landfill in New Bedford, near the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, where Dzhokhar Tsarnaev was a student.New details continued to emerge about the bombing plot and last week’s manhunt for the suspects. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York called a news conference at City Hall on Thursday to announce that Mr. Tsarnaev had told investigators from his hospital bed that he and his older brother, Tamerlan, had decided to drive to New York last Thursday night to use their remaining explosive devices in Times Square. Law enforcement officials confirmed the account, but said the brothers’ intention appeared to have been more of a spontaneous idea than a real, thought-out plan.Officials continued to revise and, in some cases, correct some of their initial accounts of the manhunt during the fast-moving events of last week. An armed carjacking that state and federal officials at first said last week had occurred in Cambridge, Mass., actually appears to have taken place across the Charles River in Allston, a Boston neighborhood, several law enforcement officials said Thursday.A Cambridge police spokesman, Dan Riviello, said the authorities were still trying to sort out whether the suspects, believed to be the brothers, had a car, or what car they used, in fleeing the location of a shooting earlier that night of an M.I.T. police officer in Cambridge, a few miles from Allston.Angel Sifontes, 27, who works at a Hess gas station on Brighton Avenue in Allston, said detectives investigating the carjacking had visited the station to see if its cameras had caught any images of the crime. “I was here when they came,” he said, adding that the carjacking was apparently out of range of the cameras.The Cambridge police initially said the carjacking had been carried out by two men “in the area of Third Street in Cambridge.” A sworn affidavit from an F.B.I. agent accompanying the criminal complaint against Dzhokhar Tsarnaev that was unsealed on Monday said “an individual carjacked a vehicle at gunpoint in Cambridge, Massachusetts.”Christina Sterling, a spokeswoman for the United States attorney’s office in Massachusetts, said Thursday that officials had written “Cambridge” in the affidavit because that is what investigators believed at the time. She said that “has since changed.”And a law enforcement official said that although ballistics tests were still being done, officials believed that most of the bullets that were fired in a shootout between the police and the brothers in Watertown, Mass., early Friday morning were fired by police officers. One law enforcement official said that “most of the expended rounds were from law enforcement, no doubt about it.”Only one gun has been recovered from the brothers, officials said. The law enforcement official, noting that the brothers had thrown explosive devices during the battle, including a pressure-cooker bomb similar to the ones used at the marathon, said it was “like a combat situation.” Tamerlan Tsarnaev was mortally wounded after the battle.“Anybody in the area was trying to shoot them, which is within protocol,” the official said. “Every time that an explosive device went off, somebody took a shot.”Several law enforcement officials said that because Dzhokhar Tsarnaev did not have a gun when he was captured after the shootout, hiding in a boat in a nearby backyard, the gunshot wound in his neck could not have been self-inflicted, as some law enforcement officials had said they believed earlier. Contrary to initial reports that the police had “exchanged” gunfire with the suspect, the official said it appeared that police officers surrounding the boat had apparently fired into it after they saw something push through the boat’s tarp, and feared it might be an explosive device or a gun.“One officer then fired,” the law enforcement official said. “The other officers there, hearing a shot going off, thought it was coming from the suspect and started shooting until the cease-fire was ordered.”In Makhachkala, Russia, the parents of the Tsarnaev brothers said at a news conference that their sons were innocent. Although officials said they had video evidence of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev putting down a knapsack where one bomb exploded, and law enforcement officials have said that he admitted to a role in the bombings, the suspects’ mother, Zubeidat Tsarnaeva, said she would not accept that her sons were guilty. “No I don’t — and I won’t,” she snapped. “Never!”Serge F. Kovaleski reported from Boston, and William K. Rashbaum and Timothy Williams from New York. Reporting was contributed by Wendy Ruderman and Ian Lovett from Boston and David M. Herszenhorn from Makhachkala, Russia.Advertisement