https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/03/business/carlos-ghosn-arrest.html
Carlos Ghosn Arrested in Tokyo Over New Accusations - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
562
AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben DooleyTOKYO — Carlos Ghosn, the embattled former chief of the Nissan-Renault-Mitsubishi auto alliance, was arrested for a fourth time on Thursday as he faces accusations of using company funds for his personal ends.Prosecutors took Mr. Ghosn from his apartment in Tokyo early in the morning, according to the state broadcaster NHK, which reported that the arrest was on suspicion of “aggravated breach of trust” related to payments to a Nissan distributor in Oman.In an arrest document, the prosecutor’s office described a scheme by which Mr. Ghosn allegedly used a Nissan subsidiary to send millions of dollars of payments to a business partner of the company abroad, which then sent money to a third company Mr. Ghosn controlled. The actions were taken for the purpose of obtaining a “personal profit,” the document said. The document did not name the business partner.Prosecutors accused Mr. Ghosn of using the method on three occasions from December 2015 to July 2018, resulting in a total of $5 million in losses to Nissan.In a statement released after the arrest, Mr. Ghosn said he was innocent of the charges, calling the action “outrageous and arbitrary.”The arrest, he said, was “part of an attempt by some individuals at Nissan to silence me by misleading the prosecutors.”Nevertheless, he said, he would still tell his story. “The prosecutors have denied me that opportunity for now, but I am confident the truth will come out,” the statement said.[Read more about the tensions at Carlos Ghosn’s automotive alliance.] A spokesman for Mr. Ghosn said Thursday that his family was concerned that prosecutors intended to return Mr. Ghosn to detention in an attempt to force him to confess to the charges.The arrest came just one day after Mr. Ghosn announced on Twitter that he would hold his first news conference next week to discuss the charges against him.Mr. Ghosn has been living in Tokyo, where he was released on bail last month more than 100 days after his first arrests on charges related to his management of the alliance among Nissan, Renault and Mitsubishi. Mr. Ghosn and his lawyers have denied any wrongdoing.The Japanese authorities first arrested Mr. Ghosn in November on charges of underreporting his compensation. He was later rearrested on related charges and then a third time on suspicion that he had shifted his personal financial losses onto Nissan’s books.Prosecutors fought to keep Mr. Ghosn in detention, arguing that he could tamper with evidence or witnesses if he were free, but he was released in early March after paying an almost $9 million bail.Last week, a special panel appointed by Nissan to suggest improvements for governance at the company said it had found evidence suggesting that Mr. Ghosn had broken the law.Nissan’s internal investigation found that from 2011 to 2018, Mr. Ghosn authorized over $30 million in discretionary payments to a business partner in Oman, according to a person familiar with the report, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the company has not yet made its full findings public. Mr. Ghosn’s representatives have said the payments were for business purposes only.In a statement on Thursday, the company said that it would not comment on legal matters, but that it had uncovered “substantial evidence of blatantly unethical conduct” by Mr. Ghosn.Mr. Ghosn may also be facing legal problems in France, home to Renault. On Wednesday, the company’s board of directors said it might pursue legal action against him for what it called “questionable and concealed practices and violations of the group’s ethical principles.”The statement followed previous decisions by the company to dock his pay and send evidence of possible misconduct to French prosecutors.Hisako Ueno contributed research.Advertisement