https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/06/movies/la-la-land-stars-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-and-los-angeles.html
L.A. Transcendental: How ‘La La Land’ Chases the Sublime - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1282
AdvertisementSupported byBy Mekado MurphyCan a Los Angeles traffic jam be joyful?The millions of drivers who navigate the city’s freeways may beg to differ, but the writer and director Damien Chazelle nonetheless opens his new film, “La La Land,” with a buoyant musical number in traffic. It’s one of many ways the film, which opens Dec. 9, finds beauty in the city and in places where other movies might not look.Though Emma Stone and Ryan Gosling play Mia and Sebastian, struggling artists who fall for each other, the biggest star may be the city itself. On the big screen, Los Angeles is more familiar as a backdrop than a magical place. During an interview in New York, Mr. Chazelle spoke about being moved by the tradition of 1920s city symphony films like “Manhatta” or “Man With a Movie Camera” that paid tribute to other metropolises. But he also said that this was a story about his own experiences moving from the East Coast with preconceived notions of what Los Angeles would be like, “that it was all just strip malls and freeways.”Rather than force Los Angeles to resemble more charming locales like Paris or San Francisco, he focused on what makes the city distinctive: the traffic, the sprawl, those endless skies.Mr. Chazelle explained how he and his crew used a freeway right alongside daily commuters, how they got a railway reopened and why he wanted to make real locations look as fake as possible.Fugue for Traffic HornsFor the opening musical number set in traffic, Mr. Chazelle also wanted to give a sense of how vast the city is. He shot the film in CinemaScope to take it all in. The scene starts with music on the radio and the idea that people stuck in traffic are stars of their own personal musicals. That leads to synchronized singing, dancing and leaping.The number was shot on a ramp connecting the 105 and 110 freeways. “What I like about it is that you see downtown,” Mr. Chazelle said. “When you go wide and reveal the skyline, it feels kind of ‘Wizard of Oz’ to me, the yellow brick road leading to the Emerald City.” While he joked that his sequence was “as fake as movies get,” he also noted that the road wasn’t blocked off, so in the lower left part of the image, civilian cars are seen driving by as they would on any day. “We’ve established the tension of the movie right away, between really heightened musical fantasia and real, urban modern city.”An Angels Flight of FancyIn the honeymoon phase of their relationship, Mia and Sebastian can be seen at different locations, including the funicular Angels Flight, which carries passengers down a short incline in Bunker Hill. “It’s a somewhat mythical L.A. neighborhood that doesn’t really exist anymore the way that it used to,” Mr. Chazelle said. “A lot of the old structures got razed, and now what you see behind this in the shot is a lot of gleaming high-rises.” The funicular was closed three years ago after a derailment (repairs were made, and community groups are pushing to reopen it). But Mr. Chazelle and his crew arranged to have it run for this day of shooting. “L.A., even more so than any other American city, obscures, sometimes neglects, its own history,” he said. “But that can also be its own magical thing, because it’s a city that reveals itself bit by bit, like an onion, if you take the time to explore it.”A Sunset Stroll, SighHere, Mia and Sebastian walk along a pretty stretch of the Colorado Street Bridge in Pasadena. The crew shot a number of scenes there, including one at a movie theater where the two see “Rebel Without a Cause.” “It’s a great place to find a lot of old L.A.,” Mr. Chazelle said. Many people drive over the bridge daily, “but it’s the kind of location you have to stop twice to appreciate it.” Here, the sun is beginning to set, the bridge’s lights have just come on, and the sky is a little pink. “There’s nothing like L.A. skies,” he said. “Because of this part of the country and the time of year we shot this” — in September — “you sometimes get these colors in the sky you don’t get in New York skies.” The filmmakers didn’t use special lighting. “We didn’t have the resources to rig up the bridge,” he said. “It’s just them and the cameraman.”Peeking at Old HollywoodMr. Chazelle sees some of the city’s old studio lots as monuments. Mia works in a coffee shop at one such “monument.” In this scene (not filmed at one of the major studios), the characters peer into a soundstage as if they’re peeking at old Hollywood and how movies used to be made. “Our production designer, David Wasco, did all these fake old movie posters, and sometimes I’d have to come up with names for them.” He decided to use the title of his first feature, “Guy and Madeline on a Park Bench” (2009), for one poster, which reimagines it as a 1930s musical.Lighting by HopperAt the Griffith Observatory, Mr. Chazelle captured both the building and the city in a painterly way, calling to mind the art of Edward Hopper. “This was part of an overall scheme with the movie,” Mr. Chazelle said, “which was, as much as possible, use real L.A., do things in-camera without digital effects, but try to find those moments where real life looks as fake as possible.” He and his crew waited to get the evening sky they wanted. And the cinematographer Linus Sandgren used a whitish-green light to bathe Mia and Sebastian in color while casting shadows on them. Mr. Chazelle chose the Swedish-born Mr. Sandgren, who comes from a European tradition of more natural cinematography, because, he said, “he had a great sensibility for doing a full-fledged Hollywood-style movie, but not by overlighting things.”Advertisement