https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/23/movies/star-is-born-male-sacrifice.html
In ‘A Star Is Born,’ Equality Is Deadly - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1196
AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Manohla DargisOn Friday, Oct. 5, after a bitter national debate about men, women and sexual assault, the Senate voted to advance the nomination of Brett M. Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court. That day was also the one-year anniversary of the New York Times article that helped topple Harvey Weinstein, igniting a sustained, worldwide storm over men, women and abuse. Here’s what else happened that day: The latest version of “A Star Is Born” opened, wowing critics and audiences with yet another, more palatable story about men, women, the power of a woman’s voice and the drama of a man’s sacrifice.This is the third remake of “A Star Is Born,” but just the latest iteration of a story that Hollywood can’t stop telling. In this take, Bradley Cooper stars as Jack, a country-rock musician, and Lady Gaga plays Ally, a struggling singer-composer. They meet in a drag club where she’s belting out “La Vie en Rose.” They spark, and soon he’s taking her on the road with him, guiding her toward a fame that she eagerly embraces. She soars while he falls, succumbing, at least ostensibly, to his addictions.Like the three earlier films also titled “A Star Is Born” — and like the story’s 1932 archetype, “What Price Hollywood?” — this version ebbs and flows with emotions and melodrama. And, just like the other “Star” films, this one turns on a mythos that has endured across much of the 20th century and into the 21st, one that suggests that female success is a zero sum game that comes at a man’s expense. And not just expense, his life: Like the husbands in every “A Star Is Born,” Jack kills himself so that his wife can continue to embrace her greatness, which here means her authentic self. Jack dies on the altar of Ally’s talent and in sacrificing himself becomes an eternally perfect love.Stories of sacrifice, literal and metaphoric, run throughout human history, so of course they have long been reliable cinematic fodder. Melodrama teams with maternal martyrs, but in this male-dominated industry many sacrifice stories involve men forfeiting their lives for family, war, a wagon train, a hapless village. Sacrifices come in different hues — purgative, nihilistic — but some of the most memorable involve a greater love in which characters selflessly lay down their lives for others. In the various versions of “A Star Is Born,” the husband assumes this victim role, a figure that Cooper — who also directed — exalts by turning a romantic melodrama into a male weepie.In remake terms, Cooper’s version hews closest to the 1976 “A Star Is Born,” which is largely a valentine to Barbra Streisand starring Barbra Streisand with Kris Kristofferson’s bare chest playing backup. Cooper’s rather more carefully balanced movie is mostly about Jack and Ally until it’s mostly about Jack — his pain, attempted recovery, continued suffering and culminating moment of grace. In the second half of the movie, the emotions flow from the deep well of his agony. And, like the audience, Ally weeps because Jack suffers and because she knows (as we know), despite everything, how beautiful he is, a view the movie sanctions with a shrewd, devastating final flashback.[Read our review of “A Star Is Born.”]At that point, Ally has begun eulogizing Jack in high style, singing his love song in a gown with an orchestra in a scene that feels like a rebuke to her pop celebrity. Now, though, Cooper goes in for the emotional kill, cutting to Jack and Ally alone in their woodsy idyll, a paradise that’s worthy of a Douglas Sirk melodrama. Jack is playing that same song while a teary, adoring Ally stands next to him. The staging conveys a sense of mortal love in exalted communion with divine death. By inserting this flashback mid-eulogy, you understand that this is how Ally will remember Jack — a martyr washed clean by her love and tears — and how you, too, are meant to remember him.All four “Star” movies end in the present on an image of the widow before a crowd. Two of the women identify themselves by their married names (“This is Mrs. Norman Maine”); Streisand sings one of the husband’s songs (“Are you watching me now?”), the camera holding on her. In the earlier films, the focus is on the woman, who honors her husband while facing her future alone. By inserting the flashback of Jack and Ally at the end of his movie, Cooper reaffirms the primacy of the couple: Jack may be dead, but he’s with Ally forever. It’s a nice morbidly romantic flourish but also a glorifying fantasy about Jack given that Ally’s talent had insured she moved past him long ago.This shift from the female survivor to the consecration of the heterosexual couple — and of male suffering — is among Cooper’s significant changes. And why not? It’s his movie, and he’ll cry if he wants to. I imagine the shift to the drama of male sacrifice also has to do with contemporary ideas about masculinity (ideally sensitive yet strong) and the therapeutic imperative in American cinema that insists characters have not only problems but also psychological profiles. Jack can’t just drink, like the men in the other films. He drinks for cause: because of his alcoholic father, his complicated relationship with his brother (Sam Elliott) and that lost paradise of Jack’s own artistic integrity.In emphasizing male pain, Cooper throws off the narrative balance a bit, although Lady Gaga evens it out with the force of her voice. (Also: Ally lives.) Despite these tweaks, Cooper remains surprisingly faithful to the “Star” template, which he doesn’t subvert. That’s striking because, for all its romanticism, the movie reads as a pessimistic take on heterosexual romantic relationships. Here, lasting equality between a man and a woman in love — artists in the same field — isn’t just difficult, it actually kills the guy. So maybe that’s why “A Star Is Born” has been an evergreen fantasy in Hollywood, which has historically shafted women, forfeiting their careers, their lives.In his book “Pursuits of Happiness,” the philosopher Stanley Cavell offers a brilliant analysis on a handful of sexy, funny Hollywood romantic comedies from the 1930s and ’40s. For Cavell, these films (like “The Philadelphia Story”) involve the creation of “the so-called new woman, the woman of equality.” Rosalind Russell and Cary Grant aren’t just bickering in “His Girl Friday;” they are optimistic participants in the comedy of equality. A generation after American women won the right to vote, these films, Cavell persuasively argues, show us our fantasies, expressing “the inner agenda of a nation that conceives Utopian longings and commitments for itself.”All of the earlier versions of “A Star Is Born” emerged in periods of fraught gender negotiation (then again, when isn’t gender fraught?). The prototype, “What Price Hollywood?,” was released in 1932, the year that the Depression figure of “the forgotten man” became an emblem of that crisis. Women were accused of stealing jobs from men, one reason perhaps that both “What Price” and the 1937 “A Star Is Born,” with their ascendant female stars, touched a Depression nerve. The 1954 film was released in a decade of strict gender conformity; the 1976 remake speaks to Streisand’s own second-wave feminism. So what is the inner agenda of a nation in the new one?Cooper’s version wrapped production in June 2017, months before the Weinstein investigations broke. To call it a #MeToo movie would be a stretch, although it is self-consciously woke to a point. Early on, Ally stamps her feet while spitting out the word “Men!” (We hear you, sister!) And Cooper treats her and Jack as equals, at least while she’s on tour with him and playing with his band. This romantic-artistic union brings them happiness and helps Jack flourish. But everything changes after Ally finds a manager, dyes her hair and starts churning out her own pop hits, a metamorphosis that he greets in one scene by turning his back on her and pouring a drink as she’s performing.Is he jealous, disgusted, depressed, all of the above? Cooper smartly lets you decide and then sends Jack spiraling toward oblivion, a downward trajectory that consumes the second half of the movie. This is where this version loosened its grip on me — all that male suffering, abusive back story and choked-up aggrandizing agony. I wept, of course. I’m a pushover for sob stories, for teary tales of sacrifice and broken hearts, even when those stories stir up both intense emotions and skepticism about those flooding feelings. So, I sniffled and succumbed while also wondering at the epic durability of the spectacle of male sacrifice.The latest “A Star Is Born” arrives amid an epochal shift with women forcing male abuse into the open, exposure that asserts such abuse is a social act (i.e., everyone’s problem), not a private offense and burden. Given the stakes, it’s no surprise that accounts of female victimization by men have recently been furiously countered by accounts of male victimization by women. (On Oct. 8, while swearing Kavanaugh into office, President Trump apologized to him and his family on behalf of the United States for the “terrible pain and suffering you have been forced to endure.”)The drama of male sacrifice continues to pump emotion and the highest of stakes into some of the most popular mainstream movies, too, including the “Star Wars” franchise and assorted comic-book adaptations. In some, this drama falls along traditional, at times patently retrograde gender lines with men putting their lives on the line — in war, on the frontier, on the street — to protect women and children at the home front. (“Star Wars” has recently played with that archetype.) That division has of course long bound women to men, making them dependent and turning them into life’s supporting players, gazing out at a world where men make stories and history.It’s no wonder that the tragic romance in the new “A Star Is Born” speaks to so many of us, whether we like it or not. The movie invites you to celebrate Ally’s triumph and mourn Jack’s fall, to argue about her agency and his authenticity, and to take issue with its narrative conventions and gender stereotypes all while you’re sobbing into your Kleenex. Its contradictions are our contradictions. That’s crucial both to the movie’s pleasures and its power: We recognize its trauma and tears because they’re so familiar, personal and deeply embedded in traditional heterosexual relations, as we are reminded by how successfully the drama of male sacrifice plays even in the era of #MeToo.An earlier version of a picture caption with this Critic’s Notebook misidentified an actor shown in a scene from “What Price Hollywood?” He was Gregory Ratoff, not Neil Hamilton.Advertisement