https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/21/magazine/the-quietly-subversive-fictions-of-dana-spiotta.html
The Quietly Subversive Fictions of Dana Spiotta - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1236
FeatureOver the course of her career, the author has created a new kind of great American novel.Dana SpiottaCreditCreditErik Madigan Heck for The New York TimesSupported byBy Susan BurtonWhen Dana Spiotta was working on her fourth novel, ‘‘Innocents and Others,’’ she sat beneath a huge bulletin board pinned with her sticky notes and research materials: lists of relevant words (passion, transformation, intimacy) and ‘‘seeing’’ devices (zoetrope, stereoscope, camera obscura), and photographs of Orson Welles, Jean-Luc Godard and the Maysles brothers. ‘‘It’s like walking into the book,’’ Spiotta told me. ‘‘You feel it all around you.’’We were standing in the room where she writes at her house in Syracuse. She opened a closet, reaching for something on a low shelf. ‘‘This is awesome,’’ she said, ‘‘This is a Swatch phone from the ’80s.’’ The phone was made of translucent red plastic with orange piping and was narrow, like a tie from the same era. ‘‘Looking at the things that are discarded tells you something about the present,’’ she said. What part of us was ignited by this machine, and why did we move on from it?Spiotta writes radiant, concentrated books that, as she has put it, consider ‘‘the way things external to us shape us: money, technology, art, place, history.’’ Her three previous novels were critically acclaimed; ‘‘Eat the Document’’ (2006) was a National Book Award finalist, cited for its evocation of ‘‘30 years of American life in a miniature panorama at once nuanced, culturally authoritative and devastatingly intimate.’’ But her work isn’t as well known as it should be, and this may have something to do with its deep and uncategorizable ambition: Her books are simultaneously vast and local, exploring great American themes (self-invention, historical amnesia) within idiosyncratic worlds (phone phreaks, ’80s Los Angeles adolescence). She has been compared with Don DeLillo and Joan Didion, but her tone and mood are distinctly her own: She’s fascinated, not alienated.‘‘Her gaze is very smart and witty,’’ George Saunders wrote to me in an email, ‘‘but doesn’t have any of that empty, snarky irony you sometimes see in writing about contemporary culture, that sense that America is rotten, past its prime, capable of nothing good. On the contrary, I think her main stance is that most difficult one: She who praises.’’‘‘Innocents and Others,’’ which will be published in March, is in part the story of two women: a documentary filmmaker and her subject. Like all of Spiotta’s work, it takes up questions of identity and transformation. In ‘‘Eat the Document,’’ a 1970s radical goes underground and surfaces as a suburban mother. In ‘‘Stone Arabia’’ (2011), an amateur musician documents his fantasy life as a rock star as if it were ‘‘real.’’ In ‘‘Innocents and Others,’’ a lonely woman in upstate New York pretends to be someone else with the powerful Hollywood men she seduces over the phone. ‘‘I could be myself on the phone,’’ she says. ‘‘The self I really was or ought to have been.’’ Spiotta is drawn to the moment when you realize that the story you’ve told yourself about who you are is false.‘‘Do you want me to show you the house?’’ she asked on a recent morning when I visited her in Syracuse, where she teaches writing along with Saunders and Mary Karr. She lives near the university, in a bungalow from the 1930s. ‘‘My spirit time, aesthetically,’’ she told me. We walked through the rooms, which were calm and spare, the heels of our boots knocking on the wood floors.Spiotta, who is 50, wears elegant, heavy-framed eyeglasses without which she is unfamiliar to herself. Her voice is rich and low-pitched, and it is exciting to be around her when she talks; she has a committed intelligence and a warm, energetic demeanor. Her hands are often in motion. She crashed them together then spread them apart, like billiard balls, describing the structure she wanted for ‘‘Innocents and Others’’: The two strands of the story meet and then separate. The book’s inventiveness is characteristic of Spiotta’s novels, incorporating lists, autobiographical essays written by the characters and precise descriptions of both real and imaginary films. In Spiotta’s work, connections with movies and music are profound. She writes not only about art itself but about the experience of it; ‘‘how you really love a song after you’ve heard it over and over, how your body feels almost desperate for the next part’’; about the rerun as well as the family room: ‘‘The dusty haze of sun coming in streams through the drapes in the midst of my afternoon solitude.’’In the kitchen, Spiotta poured us coffee from a percolator, which she likes because it makes enough for two and keeps the coffee really hot. (Spiotta lives with the novelist Jonathan Dee and her daughter, Agnes, 12, from whose father she is divorced.) The percolator also happens to be evocative of the recent past, which, broadly speaking, is the era in which Spiotta likes to write: ‘‘Everything is slightly outdated and off-kilter and somehow more visible.’’‘‘Innocents and Others’’ takes place mostly in the 1980s and ’90s. It’s a compassionate, unsparing book, full of provocative ideas about art, ethics and the formation of sensibility. Meadow, the documentary filmmaker, trades on the human ‘‘compulsion to confess.’’ Jelly, the mysterious woman who calls powerful men on the phone, also understands that we all want to reveal ourselves. She does not seduce with sex; she beguiles by listening. Eventually, she, too, wants to tell ‘‘a true story that she had never told anyone before.’’ The book’s two strands meet when Meadow makes a film about Jelly.Technology, for Spiotta, both inhibits and invokes emotion: ‘‘I would say it creates a distortion of some kind,’’ she said. ‘‘The phone puts one sense in isolation. Once you introduce a visual element, everything else falls away. What we see overrides what we hear.’’ She added: ‘‘The primacy of visual information is what I was interested in exploring in fiction. Which is sort of perverse, I guess, using prose to describe film.’’Spiotta is acutely attuned to ‘‘what happens in our minds and our bodies’’ when we see or hear. While writing the new book, she plugged old phones into wall jacks and listened to their tones. ‘‘With the phone, I really want to talk about what that feels like when it’s on your cheek,’’ Spiotta said. ‘‘It has a sound that it makes. It talks to you. We tend to think of machines as abstractions, but they are actually things.’’ Spiotta captures a once-familiar auditory experience — those ‘‘long-belled rings to say, ‘Answer,’ rude blasts of a busy signal to say, ‘No’ ’’ — and she registers the emotion we attached to those noises, too: ‘‘The ring of another person’s phone sounded so hopeful, and then it grew lonelier. It lost possibility, and you could almost see the sound in an empty house.’’‘‘There’s a weird aggressivity to listening,’’ Spiotta said as we sat with our coffee at her dining-room table. ‘‘My silence is going to make you speak, so that’s interesting to me. I’m also really hard of hearing; I wear hearing aids. So I think that’s why I fetishize sound so much. When you wear hearing aids, your sounds aren’t in the same relationship they would be. Sometimes you hear this sound’’ — Spiotta rubbed her palm on her pants — ‘‘or a sound over there, and you have to mentally put them in their proper place.’’ The hearing aids were new to Spiotta when she started writing about ‘‘Jelly and sound. What she notices, the information she gets from paying attention.’’ She added: ‘‘That’s seductive, being paid attention to. That’s almost all you have to do to win someone over, is just to see them.’’Spiotta returned to the idea of ‘‘attending’’ in our talks and email correspondence this winter. What she called ‘‘codas, afterthoughts, parentheticals, digressions, qualifications’’ were often attempts to get at saying something the exact right way.‘‘ ‘Attend’ comes from ‘attendere,’ which means ‘to stretch,’ ’’ she emailed one morning. ‘‘That is so interesting, as if attending means you have to stretch your mind toward another.’’Spiotta was born in 1966 in New Jersey. By the time she was 14, she had already lived in seven suburbs. Her father worked for Mobil Oil, but he was not a tycoon: The son of Italian immigrants, he grew up with little money and worked his way up. The frequent moves made Spiotta a perpetual new kid, a tester of experimental selves. She was close to her older sister and younger brother, and her favorite books, movies and records sustained her. These were not just interests but passions. It was ‘‘different than being a fan,’’ she wrote to me. ‘‘It was deeper. It was finding something worthy of your attention’’ — James Mason, the Beach Boys — ‘‘and then devoting attention to it until it yielded things that could never be discovered by casual engagement.’’Spiotta’s parents met in college, at Hofstra University, playing Stanley and Stella in a production of ‘‘A Streetcar Named Desire,’’ directed by a fellow student, Francis Ford Coppola. In 1979, when Spiotta was 13, her father left Mobil Oil to run Coppola’s studio, Zoetrope. Spiotta’s Los Angeles adolescence would imprint upon her deeply: The city is a setting in all of her books, and film reels through her work, as both formal influence and subject. ‘‘Just living in a great city after so many years of suburbs transformed me and my sensibility,’’ she wrote to me. ‘‘I also felt for the first time the sense of a secret history waiting to be read in the architecture and geography. This is not something you feel in the suburbs. Suburbs are designed for the opposite: no history to be read, no complications.’’Spiotta attended the progressive, arty Crossroads School and went on to Columbia University. But at the end of her sophomore year of college, she dropped out. Her parents were splitting up ‘‘but that was only part of the chaos,’’ she wrote to me. ‘‘My father, who had left Zoetrope to form his own production company, lost everything,’’ including the family’s house. ‘‘It gave me the ability to understand being privileged as well as being dead broke.’’ From age 19, Spiotta supported herself. She made her way to Seattle, ‘‘a city that seemed very friendly to the lost young person,’’ got a job at a record store and eventually enrolled at Evergreen State College, where she studied labor history and creative writing. Reading ‘‘The Dead’’ in a cafe, she began to weep.One day she and a friend called a number on the back cover of the literary journal Quarterly. The phone was answered by the journal’s editor, Gordon Lish, who invited Spiotta and her friend to come work for him in New York. They did, as managing editors. ‘‘Whatever you’re trying to hide is what you need to write from,’’ Spiotta recalls him saying. ‘‘Whatever you’re trying to hide is what makes you an interesting writer.’’ Lish introduced Spiotta to Don DeLillo, who became a mentor and a friend.While Spiotta was working on her first novel, ‘‘Lightning Field,’’ she supported herself by waitressing. The book was published in 2001, when she was 35. She wrote her next novel in secret, while working at a restaurant she owned with her former husband in upstate New York. ‘‘Eat the Document’’ brought her new attention, and she joined Saunders and Karr at the highly regarded creative-writing program at Syracuse. ‘‘As a colleague, she is a dream,’’ Karr told me. ‘‘Whip smart and tirelessly generous, but she doesn’t pander to student egos. She knows how to deliver bad news to a young writer: ruthlessly but also with an underpinning of cheer that’s infectious.’’Spiotta’s work has been cited in discussions about whether the culture properly values the work of female novelists, particularly those whose books are ‘‘ambitious, political and engaged with the big world of ideas,’’ as Katha Pollitt wrote of Spiotta and others in 2010. ‘‘Don DeLillo with a vagina,’’ one writer called Spiotta (it was meant as a compliment); ‘‘a woman’s book wrapped in a man’s book,’’ suggested a participant in an online discussion of ‘‘Stone Arabia.’’ A Booklist review of ‘‘Innocents and Others’’ advises that it is for readers of Jennifer Egan, Siri Hustvedt, Rachel Kushner and Claire Messud. These writers are comparable with Spiotta in ways that have nothing to do with gender — Egan, formally inventive; Kushner, influenced by film — and the list is meant to contextualize the novel for librarians. But it hints at a ‘‘smart woman’’ algorithm: If you like this woman who is ‘‘serious,’’ you’ll like Spiotta too. Spiotta flat out rejects this way of talking about literature. ‘‘The notion that there are gendered subjects or gendered prose styles, or gendered types of novels seems reductive to me, a not-interesting (or even coherent) way to engage anyone’s writing,’’ she emailed one morning.It was early on a frigid day in January. Spiotta and I sat in a diner in Cooperstown, a road atlas open on the apple-print oilcloth. We were about to embark on a trip. ‘‘This map: In all of my books, except ‘Lightning Field,’ stuff happens right here,’’ Spiotta said. The Mohawk River, the Erie Canal, and I-90 hung in a triple strand across the open pages. The Erie Canal’s velocity changed the transmission of goods and ideas; and it ‘‘meant identity could be changed, too, because you could take off and go to the next place,’’ Spiotta said, as a waitress refilled our mugs.Spiotta had circled our destinations on the map in ballpoint pen. This region has a multiplicity — off-the-gridders, declining factory towns, a shrine to the first Native American saint — analogous to her books. ‘‘It almost feels as if it works the way a novel works here, because there are these disparate things that seem unconnected, but because they have the same geography, they are connected,’’ she said. ‘‘You wonder, How did they all come to be here?’’Spiotta drove. We were on a road that cut through rolling farmland, and even though we were in a valley, it felt as if we were up high. We were approaching Stone Arabia, the place that gave Spiotta the title for her third book. She loved the town’s ‘‘solid and exotic’’ name and the landscape’s austere beauty. An Amish man rode behind horses on a wagon. The Amish approach to technology appeals to Spiotta: ‘‘They don’t reject; they ‘doubt’ it.’’My phone was in my lap on top of the atlas. We were using the paper map as well as GPS, and the technology was helping us navigate (sort of). There was something it was doing to our interaction too.‘‘I’m going to try it on Waze,’’ I said. ‘‘It’s smarter.’’‘‘What’s going on with this?’’ Spiotta said, looking at her own phone. ‘‘Did I turn off data?’’‘‘It doesn’t like that address,’’ I said, talking to myself. We had been driving in circles looking for a Mohawk community crafts store. ‘‘I’m going to copy and paste.’’The Waze app told us: ‘‘We are all set. Drive safely.’’‘‘Go to hell,’’ Spiotta said to the app, and we both started laughing.There was an ease in talking about, and to, our phones: a way of communicating that was automatic, known, shared. A digital-audio recorder resting atop the atlas was taping the trip, and the GPS liberated us from the roles we were playing for it. We didn’t have to try. Technology can mediate intimacy in indirect ways; here we weren’t using it as a tool to reach each other, but it connected us nonetheless.Spiotta had arranged for us to visit an old Art Deco movie theater in Gloversville. The theater’s sprightly 77-year-old director unlocked the doors. When Meadow discovers this theater in ‘‘Innocents and Others’’ — its ‘‘former grandness still evident, the gold wallpaper peeling, the velvet seats in attendant rows, though ripped and ruined’’ — she starts crying: ‘‘Not because it was a wreck, but because I felt the history. I knew that cinema had touched every small town in America.’’Inside the theater, it was dim and cold. The velvet seats were gone and there were rows of metal chairs. When preservationists began working to save the theater, our host told us, there were ‘‘mushrooms growing on the seats.’’ Water had filled the orchestra pit. ‘‘A piano and dead animals were floating in there.’’‘‘This is how it was when I came in,’’ Spiotta whispered to me, standing next to a wall with torn damask wallpaper. ‘‘A beautiful wreck.’’From the back of theater, I looked at the enormous red curtains that had once spread open to reveal a lit screen. I found myself imagining the day on which Spiotta had discovered the theater — she had tried the door, and it was open, she said. Spiotta often talks about ‘‘noticing’’ — it was part of why we were on this trip. ‘‘What you notice is who you are, maybe,’’ she had emailed me a couple weeks earlier. I was intensely interested in what Spiotta noticed in these places, and here in this theater, I was also moved by what she had raised from them. That was the mysterious part, what went on early in the morning with coffee in her room in the dark. She had made something human happen here.Susan Burton is a writer based in Brooklyn and is working on a memoir, “The Invention of the Teenage Girl,” to be published by Random House.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement