https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/08/books/review/emily-bazelon-charged.html
How Tough-on-Crime Prosecutors Contribute to Mass Incarceration - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1778
AdvertisementSupported byNonfictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By David LatCHARGED The New Movement to Transform American Prosecution and End Mass Incarceration By Emily BazelonIf you aspired to high office in the 20th and early 21st centuries, this was sound advice: Get thee to a prosecutor’s office. Politicians from both parties, from Democrats like John Kerry to Republicans like Rudolph Giuliani, parlayed prosecutorial perches into political power and nationwide fame.The basic recipe for using a prosecutor’s post as a springboard into politics required being “tough on crime,” protecting the public by putting criminals behind bars. The vast majority of state and local prosecutors in the United States are elected, and taking a punitive tack was generally considered to be the path to re-election — and, frequently, election to higher office. Prosecutors had strong incentives to be harsh rather than lenient (or merciful) when dealing with defendants, and those incentives helped shape the criminal justice system as we know it today. In the words of the law professor and historian Jed Shugerman, a scholar of prosecutors turned politicians: “The emergence of the prosecutor’s office as a steppingstone for higher office” has had “dramatic consequences in American criminal law and mass incarceration.”These consequences are on full display in “Charged: The New Movement to Transform American Prosecution and End Mass Incarceration,” by Emily Bazelon, a lecturer at Yale Law School and staff writer at The New York Times Magazine. In “Charged,” a persuasive indictment of prosecutorial excess, Bazelon argues that the lawyers who work in the more than 2,000 prosecutors’ offices around the country — conducting investigations, filing criminal charges and trying cases (or, much more commonly, striking plea bargains) — bear much of the responsibility for over-incarceration, conviction of the innocent and other serious problems of the criminal justice system.“We often think of prosecutors and defense lawyers as points of a triangle on the same plane, with the judge poised above them: equal contest, level playing field, neutral arbiter,” Bazelon writes. But this is a misconception. As the Brooklyn district attorney, Eric Gonzalez, puts it to her: “It’s all about discretion. Do you authorize the arrest, request bail, argue to keep them in jail or let them out, go all out on the charges or take a plea bargain? Prosecutors decide, especially, who gets a second chance.”To show how prosecutorial power operates in the real world, Bazelon follows two young defendants through the system: Kevin (a pseudonym), a 20-year-old from the Brownsville neighborhood of Brooklyn who is charged with illegal gun possession, and Noura Jackson, a teenager from Memphis who is accused of murdering her mother.Their cases are very different — one involving a victimless crime, the other the most heinous crime of all — and so are the district attorneys. Kevin’s prosecutor is Gonzalez, an aspiring reformer and the first Latino to serve as Brooklyn’s district attorney, while Noura’s is Amy Weirich, a hard-charging attorney in the traditional law-and-order mold. Bazelon uses these contrasting cases to demonstrate that having the right (or wrong) prosecutor can make a huge difference — between justice tempered with mercy and grave injustice.Bazelon tells the tales of Noura and Kevin in rich, novelistic prose, which at its best puts one in mind of Adrian Nicole LeBlanc’s book “Random Family” (2003), about a troubled family from the Bronx in the grip of the criminal justice system. Consider the opening to Noura’s story, the most gripping section of “Charged”: “The blood was everywhere. Spattered on the floor of the hallway, on the doorframe of the bedroom and on the bedposts. Soaked into the sheets and pillows, and covering the body splayed on the floor at the foot of the bed. Jennifer Jackson was naked. Her face was covered by a wastepaper basket. Her chest and torso and hands were slashed, the pale skin torn by the blade of a knife. She’d been stabbed a total of 50 times.”Bazelon interweaves Kevin’s and Noura’s stories with a remarkable amount of academic research by law professors, criminologists and other social scientists. The endnotes, replete with charts and graphs, run to more than 50 pages and acknowledge intellectual debts to such thinkers as Angela J. Davis, Paul Butler, Michelle Alexander and William Stuntz. This combination of powerful reporting with painstaking research yields a comprehensive examination of the modern American criminal justice system that appeals to both the head and the heart.The study of criminal justice is the study of power, and as a veteran legal journalist, Bazelon has long been concerned with this theme. Her last book, “Sticks and Stones,” explored the culture of bullying and painted a nuanced portrait, rejecting a simple dichotomy between blameworthy bullies and innocent victims. “Charged” is considerably less balanced — in, say, its discussion of plea-bargaining, which Bazelon (convincingly) asserts is used to excess without sufficiently acknowledging its necessary role in the system, or of pro-prosecutor rulings by the Supreme Court, which she analyzes almost entirely from a public-policy perspective with little focus on their legal reasoning. This could cause readers who do not share Bazelon’s politics to dismiss her core argument. But to the extent that it’s a polemic, “Charged” reflects its author’s passion for her subject. “As a journalist,” she writes, “I’ve never felt a greater sense of urgency about exposing the roots of a problem and shining a light on the people working to solve it.”Bazelon doesn’t go easy on prosecutors, but at the same time she believes that American prosecution can heal itself. Discussing a group of young, diverse, reform-minded prosecutors whom she calls “the New D.A.s,” she argues that “prosecutors also hold the key to change. They can protect against convicting the innocent. They can guard against racial bias. They can curtail mass incarceration.” In a lengthy appendix, she offers “21 Principles for 21st-Century Prosecutors,” a road map for those interested in reducing incarceration and increasing fairness in the justice system.Which of Bazelon’s two visions for the future of American prosecution will carry the day: a continuation of the deplorable status quo or a revolution in fairness led by “the New D.A.s”? Recent developments offer reason to be hopeful. As was true of the factors that led us to the current sad state of affairs, it’s all about incentives.The movement to reform the criminal justice system enjoys support from across the political spectrum, from Black Lives Matter activists trying to protect minority communities to libertarians like the Koch brothers troubled by government overspending. In December, Donald Trump, who campaigned for the presidency on a law-and-order platform, signed the First Step Act, a bipartisan package of sentencing and prison-condition reforms.This broader criminal justice reform reflects, and also contributes to, changing views of prosecutors. No longer simply the women and men who wear the “white hats,” prosecutors today are seen — and properly so — as major players in the criminal justice system who can do great harm as well as good.As a result, in some cases, a prosecutor’s record is no longer a political asset but a liability, or at least a mixed blessing. Take Kamala Harris, whose stints as San Francisco’s district attorney and California’s attorney general fueled her rise to the United States Senate. She now finds her quest for the Democratic presidential nomination complicated by decisions she made in her past positions: She has come under attack largely for having been too aggressive as a prosecutor, a historical novelty in American politics.If prosecutorial service is no longer a golden ticket to a successful political career, then being a prosecutor could lose some of its luster to young lawyers seeking power and prestige. Perhaps that’s a good thing. In these often overlooked but incredibly important posts, we need people committed to advancing the interests of justice, not just their own ambitions.David Lat, a former federal prosecutor, is the founder of the legal news website Above the Law and the author of the novel “Supreme Ambitions.”CHARGED The New Movement to Transform American Prosecution and End Mass Incarceration By Emily Bazelon 409 pp. Random House. $28.OpinionEmily Bazelon and Miriam KrinskyOpinionThe Editorial BoardAdvertisement