https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/07/us/politics/sherrod-brown-2020-president.html
Sherrod Brown Won’t Run for President in 2020 - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2599
AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney Ember and Jonathan MartinSenator Sherrod Brown, the populist Ohio Democrat known for extolling the “dignity of work,” announced Thursday that he would not seek the Democratic nomination for president, ceding the primary field to other left-leaning candidates with broader national appeal.His exit comes as better-known Democrats like former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. prepare to announce their own plans for 2020, and as the field itself has swelled to 14 candidates, including fellow liberal senators like Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren.Allies of Mr. Brown said on Thursday that his decision to forgo a 2020 bid had nothing to do with the signs that Mr. Biden is preparing to enter the race. Rather, they said, Mr. Brown ultimately resolved that he was content in the Senate and lacked the consuming drive to become president. And there were obvious practical obstacles to the 2020 nomination for a 66-year-old white man with a mix of liberal and moderate views and a relatively modest donor base. Indeed, for Mr. Brown, the popularity and fund-raising strength of Mr. Sanders, a fellow populist, were obstacles that were at least as big as any Mr. Biden might present.[Why are so many Democrats bowing out of a 2020 campaign this week? Here are four reasons.]Speaking to reporters between votes in the Capitol on Thursday, Mr. Brown quickly noted that he “didn’t have a lifelong ambition to be president.” Though he argued that there was a “path for me,” highlighting his progressive credentials, he said he felt tugged to remain in the Senate, a job he relishes more than some of his colleagues who covet the presidency.Mr. Brown, who was a finalist in the 2016 vice-presidential sweepstakes, also dismissed the prospect of serving in that role in 2020 but said whoever the nominee is should compete for Ohio. “I’m not even interested in thinking about that,” he said about the vice presidency.Some Democrats had seen Mr. Brown as a compelling possibility, even in a packed Democratic contest, because he was the only major Democrat last November to win a statewide seat in Ohio. The bet was that his success in a Republican-leaning battleground state would translate to broad support.In recent weeks, he had embarked on a listening tour of early primary states that included stops in Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina, which had been widely viewed as an indication he was seriously leaning toward running.But while Mr. Brown, with his signature gravelly voice and populist rhetoric, generated some initial excitement — especially among those Democrats who believe defeating President Trump depends largely on the party’s ability to win in the Midwest — his road to the nomination seemed almost hopelessly long. Neither well known outside of his home state nor particularly fiery, he likely would have struggled to stand out from a crowded field that included dynamic rising stars and more established politicians.And even he seemed to acknowledge recently that he might have trouble competing for the nomination. Asked in Selma, Ala., last weekend about his chances in such a racially diverse field of Democratic candidates, Mr. Brown ticked off his progressive bona fides. But then he pointed to his face. “I can change a lot of things,” he said, “but I can’t change this part of me, right?”Still, Mr. Brown has long championed working-class issues that have resonated in Ohio’s conservative quarters while also supporting liberal social causes like women’s reproductive rights. Though he splits with President Trump on almost every issue, he is often aligned with him on trade, with an openness to tariffs and other measures billed as protecting American manufacturing jobs that are at odds with his own party.But it was his nearly seven-point victory in November for his third term in the Senate that suggested to his supporters that he could be singularly positioned to win back not just Ohio but the key Midwestern and Rust Belt states that Mr. Trump flipped in 2016: Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. Mr. Brown ran roughly 10 percentage points better than Hillary Clinton did in Ohio two years earlier.[Check out the Democratic field with our candidate tracker.] His decision not to run will deprive the field of a candidate who enjoys deep ties to organized labor and could make it easier for Mr. Biden to win over some unions. But Mr. Brown said he had not talked to the former vice president about his decision.“His getting in or out had zero impact on this,” he said.Mr. Biden is not the only candidate who could benefit from the exit of the Ohio populist. Without Mr. Brown, Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota is the lone Midwesterner elected to statewide office in the race.An Ohio state legislator who hung out at union halls in his free time, Mr. Brown was first elected to the House of Representatives in 1992. One of his first votes was against the North American Free Trade Agreement. He also voted against the Defense of Marriage Act and against the Iraq war.Elected to the Senate in 2006, he has criticized Wall Street banks and defended the Affordable Care Act, refusing to accept congressional health care until it passed.“I don’t buy the left or right,” he said after his victory in the midterms. “You have to be authentic about whom you fight for and what you fight against. That’s just who I am.”Ohio born and bred, with a tangle of unruly gray hair, Mr. Brown is often praised for projecting an authenticity that at times comes across as almost aggressively disheveled. He is an ardent fan of the Cleveland Indians, known to wear the team’s sweatshirt even on the campaign trail. He talks frequently about how his suits are made just miles from where he lives in Cleveland. On his lapel, he wears a canary pin that a steelworker gave him years ago.But although Mr. Brown was considered a possible running mate for Mrs. Clinton in 2016, he is not well known on the national stage — especially compared to other potential candidates including Mr. Sanders and Mr. Biden. As part of his decision-making process, he set off on what he called his “Dignity of Work” tour, billing it as an opportunity to listen to voters and spread his signature message across the country.“The dignity of work is a value that unites us all,” he said in a statement announcing the tour. “It’s what I fight for every day representing the people of Ohio, and it’s what we will fight for together on this tour around the country.”Advertisement