https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/16/arts/television/stephen-colbert-elizabeh-warren-dna-test-trump.html
Stephen Colbert Says Warren’s DNA Test Reveals She ‘Is Running for President’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2797
AdvertisementSupported byBest of Late NightBy Giovanni RussonelloWelcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.Senator Elizabeth Warren says she successfully called President Trump’s bluff, but he’s not admitting it. The president repeatedly accused Warren of lying about her Native American heritage, saying he would donate $1 million to a charity of her choice if a DNA test showed her to have Native American ancestry.But last week, she received the results of a DNA test that showed her to have a small amount of Native American blood. Now she says she expects Trump to pay up. Stephen Colbert said the whole thing seemed to imply that Warren has her sights set on a higher office.“This test accurately reveals, with high confidence, that Elizabeth Warren is running for president.” — STEPHEN COLBERTOn “The Daily Show,” Trevor Noah highlighted Trump’s response: The president told reporters on Monday that he did not care about Warren’s DNA test, and claimed he had never offered to pay $1 million to charity.“Even though Elizabeth Warren took the test, now he says he’s not going to pay the million dollars. So basically, this white man made a promise to Senator Warren and then went back on what he said. So I guess she really is Native American after all.” — TREVOR NOAHColbert rolled tape from the July rally where Trump said he would pay $1 million to charity if Warren produced DNA results showing Native American heritage. At the rally, Trump said he would give Warren the DNA test “gently, because we’re in the #MeToo generation.” Colbert was outraged by that.“I’m going to stop right there, just to point out that Trump went out of his way to stuff a #MeToo joke into the middle of his racist tirade. It’s like he’s making a turducken that’s just all turd.” — STEPHEN COLBERTColbert was off the air last week, which meant he missed out on the opportunity to make fun of Kanye West for his appearance in the Oval Office. But on Monday, Colbert managed to get a swipe in with help from his bandleader, Jon Batiste.STEPHEN COLBERT: I had this one weird dream where I could have sworn Kanye West went to the Oval Office and started talking about repealing the 13th Amendment.JON BATISTE: Yeah, that happened.COLBERT: That happened? I thought maybe I had just been drinking absinthe all week.BATISTE: No, it happened.COLBERT: Which — spoiler alert, I was drinking absinthe all week.“This is one of the most disturbing violations of human rights in recent memory, and yet Donald Trump is bending over backwards to find excuses for Saudi Arabia, and keep in mind: He can barely bend forwards.” — STEPHEN COLBERT, discussing Trump’s defense of the Saudi government after the alleged killing of a journalist “We’re here until Friday night, and then we go back to L.A. This is a limited engagement, just like Pete Davidson and Ariana Grande.” — JIMMY KIMMEL, announcing the start of a week’s worth of shows taped at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in New YorkSpill Your Guts or Fill Your Guts is one of the more shamelessly gossipy games that a guest can be asked to play on “The Late Late Show.”Jimmy Kimmel’s nephews are not big fans of cooked ants.Lin-Manuel Miranda, the creator of “Hamilton,” is turning another one of his stage productions into a film. He’ll be on “The Late Show” on Tuesday.Tarana Burke, the activist and founder of Me Too, wants to remind us that the movement was originally meant to be focused largely on helping survivors get resources.Plus, Ideas for What to Watch Tonight:Seven TV Shows That Are Perfect for MultitaskingThe 100 Best Movies on Netflix Right NowThe 25 Best Films of the 21st CenturyAdvertisement