https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/16/dining/insa-restaurant-review.html
Insa Brings Korean Cooking to Industrial Brooklyn - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
657
AdvertisementSupported byRestaurant Review13 PhotosView Slide Show ›When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Pete WellsFrom the first soft bite of blood sausage, I knew I would like Insa. Just seeing the word “soondae” on the menu of this new Korean restaurant had been enough to get my hopes up. Purplish links of coagulated pigs’ blood bound by rice and an arterial network of springy, skinny cellophane noodles, soondae does not tend to travel far from Korean neighborhoods. Insa sits between a moving company and a mechanic’s garage in an industrial patch of Brooklyn near the Gowanus Canal. The area is not crowded with Korean restaurants or, for that matter, Koreans.Soondae here? If nothing else, it suggested that Insa had plenty of confidence.I dragged one dark, purplish slice across a line of salt laced with ground chile and perilla seeds. The seared skin crackled between my teeth: the sign of an animal-gut casing. Blood sausage can sometimes be dry, but Insa’s soondae spilled with tender crumbs that were almost juicy, moistened with braised pigs’ snouts and ground belly meat. The noodles gave it a little bounce but didn’t get in the way of the deep, galvanic taste of iron. It was wonderfully well made, and not quite like any soondae I’d tasted on 32nd Street or on the kimchi belt along Northern Boulevard in Queens.Insa was opened before Christmas by Sohui Kim and her husband, Ben Schneider. He is the designer, woodworker, decorator of the themed karaoke rooms in back, and propmaster of the retro lounge that’s dressed in David Lynch red. She is the chef.Mr. Schneider was raised in Manhattan. Ms. Kim moved from Seoul to the Bronx when she was 10. The couple also owns the Good Fork, about two miles away in Red Hook, Brooklyn, where the menu dips its toes into Korean cuisine. The one at Insa dives straight into it.Chefs trying to get American eaters to fall for another country’s cooking often toss essential flavors out the window. The restaurant crosses over, but the cuisine becomes roadkill. Insa is a rare crossover that limits most of its tweaks to externals. Traditional Korean recipes may be altered, in texture for instance (soondae is not usually pan-seared), but their spirit is largely left intact.For customers who did not grow up with Korean food, Insa puts extra clarity into the way the menu is written and explained by servers, most of whom are lavishly tattooed. Almost nothing on it qualifies as fusion, though. Even the seafood corn dog has antecedents in Seoul, although Insa hasn’t yet copied the impressive Korean idea of incorporating French fries right into a corn dog.Officially, Insa is a barbecue restaurant. Gas burners are punched into the centers of the long mess-hall tables lined up between buffed wooden benches. The tables are about as wide across as a rowboat. This made conversation a challenge — one of my guests, who has a voice that could wake sleeping livestock, later said he wanted to borrow a karaoke microphone to make himself heard — but we needed the space when the rest of the food came.As soon as the blue flames jump up, little dishes (banchan) start to circle the ring. Good banchan signal seriousness in a Korean kitchen, and the ones at Insa are really flavorful, made with care: cabbage and daikon, pink with chile paste and fermented on site; chewy black beans in salty syrup; peanuts with silvery dried anchovies; chewy bands of cuttlefish with time-release flavor.Barbecue was rarely my favorite thing on the table, though. The very fresh-tasting squid and octopus grilled up beautifully, but I missed the scent of charcoal, and Insa’s gas flames seemed too low to give the marinated short rib strips or thinly shaved brisket the crisp edges I like. The dishes I look forward to eating again are those cooked in the open kitchen off to one side.Insa’s yuk hwe is one of the most suave versions of beef tartare any Korean restaurant has served me. The chopped eye of round is chilly and firm, crunchy with Asian pear and fried capers, and deliciously shiny with sesame oil. I would have lapped it up with a spoon, but it was, no doubt, better on gnarled curls of shrimp chips. Insa’s tteokbokki are terrific, too: pudgy little fingers of rice stick blackly seared on the bottom for crunch. They are tossed with tender ovals of seafood sausage and smacked with chile paste.The heat was not incinerating, but it was warm enough. At other times, Insa didn’t supply the burn I’ve come to love at other Korean restaurants. The bibimbap in particular seemed afraid of getting noticed.Spice doses can be recalibrated, though. What sets Insa apart is a modern chef’s sensitivity to technique and ingredients. (The squid that are so good on the grill are just as welcome in the thick and unusually fluffy seafood pajeon.) The chef de cuisine, Michael Stokes, came up with the soondae, and the sous-chef, Yong Shin, is responsible for the seafood corn dog, a fine snack to eat at Insa’s tiki bar.There, no outrigger dangles from the ceiling, and an animated underwater video screen stands in for the tanks of live fish at torchlit palaces like the dearly departed Kahiki Supper Club in Columbus, Ohio. But the bartenders wear aloha shirts as they reach for coconut mugs and Fu Manchu cups for their modernized Polynesian drinks.A tiki bar! Exotica from Polynesia, a land so vaguely defined in the American imagination that it was able to encompass piña coladas, egg rolls and teriyaki chicken, clearly has no business in a serious modern Korean restaurant. But bastardized cocktails are preferable to bastardized cuisine.The cocktail menu looks interesting. To tell the truth, I never made it past the mai tai. The first one I tried was dominated by “local almond milk syrup” (orgeat cooked up in Red Hook from nonlocal nuts), but in my second, the lime juice was prominent, the way it should be. It wasn’t a Trader Vic’s mai tai, but it was all right in its own way, I decided, as I finished my fourth.By that time, I was in the jungle room, clutching a microphone for dear life as if that would be enough to give me the extra octaves I needed for “Blue Bayou.” I hadn’t meant to sing. But one of the servers had opened the door on a room swaddled in orchids and tropical leaves and artificial turf. Then somebody keyed a Dolly Parton number into the karaoke machine. “There’s also a deep-sea room, a space room and a psychedelic room,” the server said, discreetly closing the door.I’d like to describe all the others. To tell the truth, I never made it past the jungle room.An earlier version of this article misstated the distance between the Good Fork and Insa. It is about two miles, not one.When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.This information was last updated on Nov. 27, 2018Reservations powered by Resyemail: petewells@nytimes.com. And follow Pete Wells on Twitter: @pete_wells.Advertisement