https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/learning/what-students-are-saying-about-controversial-murals-senioritis-and-a-17-foot-python.html
What Students Are Saying About: Controversial Murals, ‘Senioritis’ and a 17-Foot Python - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
789
AdvertisementSupported byCurrent Events ConversationBy The Learning NetworkIn this week’s edition of Current Events Conversation, we bring you student responses to three very different writing prompts. Curious what teenagers think about a controversial mural at a San Francisco High School? Or about their thoughts on how senior year should be spent? Or about their creative stories about a 17-foot python found in Florida? Keep reading.But, before you get to the comments, we want to give a special shout out to students from the Julia Reynolds Masterman Laboratory and Demonstration School in Philadelphia who have commented on our prompts every week this school year. For the past few weeks — and this week in particular — they have stepped up their writing game by replying to students from other schools and their own. Because these are the kinds of conversations we love to read, we’ve highlighted many of their excellent exchanges in our roundup below.Thank you to all the students who have written on our site this week and welcome to students from three new schools: Glen Burnie, Md.; Midland School, Los Olivos, Calif.; and Quaker Valley, Pa. Next week our Currents Events Conversation will be taking a short break. We’ll be back on May 2 for a new roundup or student comments, with two week’s-worth of student writing. See you then!Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear as they were originally submitted.__________This week, we asked students to weigh in on a debate brewing at George Washington High School in San Francisco: Should a series of Depression-era murals that depict the life of George Washington — including images of enslaved people and a dead Native American — remain in the school? Does their historic and cultural value mean they should stay? Or does the reality that some members of the community find the paintings to be offensive, dehumanizing and inappropriate for a high school take precedence?Students argued their positions passionately. But what we appreciated most about their responses was that they were interacting with one another. We saw many students replying to and recommending each other’s comments — acknowledging when someone made a good point, adding their own ideas and asking each other tough questions. Below, we highlight some of the best exchanges we read.Facing an ugly history — and the trauma that comes with itI believe the George Washington High school should be proud to have these murals. They may be a little dated, however, I believe that having this history remain with the youth of today is as important as ever … The murals show our history, which was ugly, which is true, but needs to never be forgotten, in fear of it happening again.I believe the school should not paint over it the murals, but instead have a plaque explaining the history behind these photos. Example, “This picture explains how, though he was a valiant general, George also kept slaves …” or “ this dead native american shows the hardships the natives have faces and still face to this very day from the white people.” I think the murals should stay, and continues to show our ugly but very true american history.— George Siokos, Masterman Philadelphia@George Siokos George, but is it worth having to walk under murals of dead kin everyday. Is it worth being reminded everyday that your ancestors were not even considered human. I respect your opinion, but I believe that history can be taught without bringing people’s self esteem down.— Tino K., Masterman Philadelphia@George Siokos I think you make a very fair point that these are pieces of history and they definitely had a lot of effort put into them, and that is something that should not be overlooked. This is a very hard question, and I can definitely see how one could take either side. You certainly shouldn’t just get rid of something that someone put a lot of work into, especially if it is historically valuable, but is that really more important than making students feel safe and not discriminated against at school, which is supposed to be one of the safest places in a kid’s life? It would be nice if there were a compromise, a way to preserve the art while also upholding students’ self confidence. Of course, you’re certainly entitled to your own opinion, but in the end, I feel that it is more important that all students feel equal than it is to save paintings that degrade certain racial groups.— Sivan Frankel, Masterman School, Philadelphia, PA@George Siokos I totally agree. Even though these murals can be offensive, they express a part of our history. They shouldn’t be destroyed.— Kaya Perelman, Masterman, PhiladelphiaI think that the murals should get taken down if people are actually getting offended. Some people might say that kids need to learn about these events, which is true. But they can just learn about them in class. If nobody cared about the murals the if would be different because no one would be harmed by them. But people are feeling dehumanized by the murals and that’s not right. So I think that since people really care about these murals and are offended by them then they should be gotten rid of.— Sabrina Mintz, Masterman, Philadelphia@Sabrina Mintz While I agree they should be taught about in class, they can’t be taught and forgotten about, the events need to be acknowledged and remembered. History is history and it cannot be changed, the best we can do today is learn from them and that’s a reason the murals should stay, it’s so we can remember the events and not repeat them.— Benjamin Chiem, J.R. Masterman - Philadelphia, PA@Sabrina Mintz I also agree, the murals are still a part of history no matter how the events are described. It’s better to learn about history, compared to just hiding from it and trying to forget about it. People need to be aware of how it used to be, and how far we’ve gotten in our present time.— Benga Oni, JR Masterman, Philadelphia PAI think that the murals should stay in the high schools because the past is the past and there is nothing we can do about it. Not all of history is good, and we need to learn how to accept that. Of course some of these murals may not honor or have a positive purpose, but history was not smooth and either should these murals be. If the artist wanted to create something that depicts a darker time in history, so be it. We cannot sugar coat the past, for it happened.— Sophia, Masterman@Sophia It’s not about changing the past … We are still taught history in our classes after all. I think we should view the situation through scientific point of view. For example, if we just accepted the murals even if people found this offensive, would not this be evolutionary stasis? We wouldn’t evolve or gain anything by acceptance which would leave us in stasis. However, if were to remove the murals, we would evolve in a way of intelligence. We would be more intolerant of racism and the such.Yeah it seems small to remove one mural, but what about the kids who go that school? It probably would affect them to some degree at least. Remember the Galapagos islands? It was only one minor change; a drought. To the world, this drought in the Galapagos was nothing. However, to the finches living there, it sure was a big deal!… Humans are no longer primitive anymore. I don’t think we are dealing with issues of physical evolution anymore, but instead evolution regarding intelligence.— G Jap, Masterman School, Philadelphia PAA symbol of resilienceFor me, The murals remain us a part of the history and help us to be stronger. That remind us to understand how difficult it was for the ancestors to g fought to enjoy the privilege. Together we are strong.— Dorrotie 3A, YC CLIP@Dorrotie 3A I agree with you all the way because history makes up what we are now and does make us stronger. True statement.— Teddy Santos, Julia R. MastermanRemembering the past to face the futureIn my opinion, if something happened, there is no point in trying to cover it up under the wraps of time. For example, in the case of the murals, George Washington did fight in (what I believe to be) the 7 Years War, and did command Native Americans, who were, at the time, employed by both the British and French forces. Also, George Washington did own slaves, as did many of his contemporaries, it was just a product of the times.A good example of why we should not try to shield past blemishes from the people of the youth is the Armenian genocide of 1915 to 1917. Adolf Hitler used the reasoning that, if no one remembered the Armenian Genocide, (which they hadn’t) no one will remember the Holocaust. He said “After all, who today remembers the genocide of the Armenians?” All in all, those are my thoughts on why we should not try to get rid of the mistakes of the past, because if we do, history is bound to repeat itself.— Jonah A., Masterman School@Jonah A.This is a wonderful comment— Hank, Philadelphia, PA@Jonah A. I agree with how you related the Armenian genocide and the Holocaust to this issue. As with both genocides, genocides with these natives should not be forgotten, and it being placed on the walls of the high school, should not be removed to never forget what early Americans did to natives.— George Siokos, Masterman Philadelphia@Jonah A. I strongly agree. The past isn’t something we should hide and keep in the shadows. It is something we should always pay attention to and grow from. Without knowledge of historical events, we may repeat the same mistakes, which wouldn’t have a great result on the later future— Abibat Lateef, Julia R. Masterman@Jonah A. Well written, and great background. I definitely agree about not covering up our history, because why hide what has already been shown?— Naiima Jabati, Julia R. Masterman, PhiladelphiaDo these murals belong in a school?I feel like it really does matter that these murals are in high school. We are intended to learn a lot in high school so if we do see murals that depict such bad actions then the students will be influenced more than they are already. As a student i understand that our minds are still developing and very easily manipulated. If these murals would be anywhere else like in a government office building, hospital or a courthouse the adults that are in those places already know right from wrong, they already have a formed opinion of their own. Unlike the teenagers that walk the halls of this school.— Ciarah Torres, Iuka Mississippi@Ciarah Torres I agree for the most part, but I believe that if these murals are thought of as offensive it doesn’t matter where they are. I also believe that it doesn’t matter what your age is, you can still be manipulated or convinced of something if you’re exposed to it enough. Besides these minor details I agree with your comment.— Samuel Hamilton, MastermanHaving these types of murals in a school might be a little harsh especially because teenagers are just developing. Instead of just having a mural, it would be nice to have a little excerpt somewhere explaining what is happening in the mural. During history, students should learn about the murals, too and discuss their views.— Jessica H., J.R. Masterman School, Philadelphia, PA@Jessica H. I agree with you. We should not try to cover up history’s mistakes. We should try to learn from them.— Justin T. Liu, Masterman; in Philly@Jessica H. I totally agree. We can’t just ignore these things, no matter how hard they are to accept. Also, having extra information about the murals is an excellent idea. It is important for the students to understand what they are seeing and why it was created.— Anya Finlay, Masterman- Philadelphia, PALearning about the good and bad parts of historyI recommend that the school remove the murals from the school. I think they should paint a new mural showing different aspects of George Washington’s life that aren’t as offensive.— Christian, Walla Walla High School@Christian I can see where you are going and it is a good line of thinking yet it still honors George Washington, and to honor a person you must honor them entirely in all that they have done, don’t you agree? Really, in my opinion, it would just end up with the same result as Washington was a slave owner and a man who oppressed many people and you can’t really ignore that. Still, your point is valid as the murals depict a cruel and offensive part of Washington’s life and evoke emotions amongst the people who are members of the groups he oppressed so it makes sense to immediately want to get rid of it, yet history is history and it is important to acknowledge atrocities done by people whom we honor and revere.— Reza Chity-Guevara, Masterman, Philadelphia, PA@Christian I respect your opinion but if you want to glorify a person such as George Washington, you should know his entire personality/beliefs and what he did in his lifetime. By just showing the aspects of Washington’s life that cutting out how he harshly treated others, a false understanding of his personality can be interpreted with his heroic side showing only.— Hope A, Masterman, PhillyI believe the murals should stay. There are few reasons for this. The first and most obvious one is that they have historical importance. They were painted a long time ago and lots of other buildings and art from the past are still being protected today. Another reason is that it is educational. Lots of teachers and textbooks make George Washington out to be a great person, but learning about the bad things he did is also very important because no one is perfect and we all have our mistakes. The final reason is that we shouldn’t sugarcoat history. No matter what happened, we should still learn about it. These murals are in a high school. They are for sure old enough to realize that this is what happened in the world. That’s why they should keep the murals.— Tierra G., Walla Walla, WA@Tierra G. I couldn’t stress that point enough. I agree with you when you say that these murals carry so much historical importance. This is such an important part of our history and we can’t just tear it down. The students need to be able to learn from these paintings and censoring the past won’t make it easier. Keeping these pictures up will help us from ever backtracking into our old ways.— Maeve McNichol, Masterman, Philadelphia, PA__________In “How to Cure the New Senioritis? Make Yourself Your Senior Project,” Ned Johnson writes about the feeling students today have near the end of their senior year in high school — not freedom, but purposelessness. In our related Student Opinion question, we asked students if they felt this way, why and how their final semester of high school should be spent.Many of our readers agreed that high school can feel like a “four-year audition for the right college” and, once they’ve been accepted, they have nothing to do. We loved the suggestions they came up with for making their senior year more productive and meaningful.High school feels like a ‘four-year audition for the right college.’I would agree with the idea that high school seems to be just a prolonged entry-point to college. All of our education up to this point is, “It’ll be harder in [insert higher level here]”. We are told preschool is prep for elementary. Elementary is prep for middle school. Middle school into high school. And high school into college. The only difference is that the others are preordained. You will always get into the next school; only college is exclusive.However, our previous experience in the educational path, as well as pressures from teachers and authority figures in our life, push us into believing that we HAVE to get into college, and so we spend our entire high school career into putting together a good college resume, making sure our transcript will set us apart. And once all that prep has gotten us into a school, we have a good amount of time where, (like the author says) we’re purposeless. We have nothing to do.— Chris, Chicago, ILI agree that high school can seem like nothing but an entry point to college, and much of that is due to how schools push college to be the main motivation. My own school heavily pushes the idea of being college and career ready, which is better than some schools as it embraces that some students will not be pursuing a college education, but will instead be going directly in to the career field. While this is a step up from other schools, the main motivation that students are given to succeed often still is college, leaving many students with little motivation their freshman and sophomore years as I have seen many of my peers struggle to come back from grades from these periods as they begin focusing on college. High schools should motivate students not just for the end goal, but for the learning processes in between. High school is a highly developmental stage, and treating it as one and encouraging learning for experience and not just the end goal of college will be more beneficial to students.— Alexis, Florida‘Senioritis’ is real.As a senior in high school myself it definitely feels like I have little control over what is happening in my life with the college process because I know nothing about it. A lot of adults also expect us to know what we want to do with our lives right now but I have no idea so that makes me feel even more unprepared, like I’m doing the process wrong. I feel as though the “senioritis” I experience is being so stressed out that I can’t do anything, all I can do is sit there. I think my high school has definitely prepared me academically for college yet I still feel unprepared because there is really no one teaching you how to handle and experience the college process.— Colby, Northbrook, ILIn my opinion, second semester senior year has been the hardest part of my high school career, solely revolving around motivation to get to class. After being accepted to the college that I wanted to go to, I have started thinking that “there is no point in learning this new material”, other than to just pass the class and get out of here. I believe that there should be an option to get out of the classroom to go and spend time doing something that will actually help you in college, or something that focuses on your major.— Jayne, Northbrook, ILI’m a sophomore of high school, and I’m already showing symptoms of senioritis. I’ve been keeping up with a rigorous schedule since my first day of freshman year, and the burnout is real. It’s now that time of year that I choose my classes for junior year and hope that my choices will help me build an appealing transcript for colleges to judge me on. Looking at my class choices, it doesn’t look like I’ll be slowing down anytime soon when it comes down to academics and sports. It has me thinking what I’ll be doing during my senior year. Will I continue to pile up AP courses? Or will I dedicate some time to figure out myself and what I want to do? Ideally, I will be able to ease up during my second semester of senior year and work on volunteering, building relationships, and “recharging”, as the article mentions, before I begin my even-harder years at college.— Emma Coleman, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NCHow to spend senior year? Celebrate and relax.Who can blame a group of seniors, who have worked so hard for three and a half years, for wanting a break? Now is the time to enjoy yourself and your accomplishments. While it is not traditional, schools should reward the hard work of their seniors, maybe even by encouraging time to relax and bask in the rewards of your hard work. After all, high school is over, and you reached your goals. That is something to celebrate!— Allison, Northbrook, IllinoisI believe seniors should continue to challenge themselves if they would like but in the case it feels like just a complete waste of time; it might be better to direct their attention elsewhere. The second semester of senior year is the last time in our lives where we will truly be free. We still are living at home and having someone cook, clean, and pay for us. I really think the second semester of your senior year should be used to let loose and do the things you’ve always wanted to do before starting the next chapter of your life.— Leila Belfadil, Hoggard High School, Wilmington NCGiving yourself a break I think is very important to prepare for your coming year of college. You will be in a different atmosphere with different people and harder classes, so there is enough stress there already. I agree that “high school is merely a four-year audition for the right college,” because everything students devote their work to during high school, is for it to pay off in their future by getting them into the college of their choice. Just having a time period to relax and regroup would be more beneficial than continuing to stress throughout your senior year worrying about impressing your future college.— Alex Lee, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NCLearn about the real world.I think that in order to prepare a high school senior for college the first thing that must be done is to let them get a taste of what it’s like in the real world and to help them cope to that. To elaborate, I think that seniors should be given classes to help them plan for their future either in our out of college. I think they should be given classes that are designed to prepare them specifically for life ahead, not some arbitrary classes that won’t benefit them in the future. Classes like personal finance, accounting, and other similar classes should be made for the seniors to help them to develop skills they will need as soon as they become independent.— Ethan Pardieu, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NCThere are so many kids that go off to college and just have absolutely no clue how to live everyday life. They may not know how to do laundry or cook their own food. I intend to learn a lot more about being self sufficient in the second semester of my senior year. Need to learn how to do taxes, look for insurance, learn how to rent an apartment, pay bills, manage money, ect. There are so many aspects of everyday life for adults that I have absolutely no clue how to approach and that I direly need to learn.— Quaid Sutherland, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, NCI think for the end of senior year you should still be taking classes, but different types of classes. For example I am in Personal Finance currently and it is without a doubt the most important class I have ever taken to prepare me for life after high school. I’m not sure how kids can manage to be by themselves in the real world without taking Personal Finance. I think classes like those should be required for seniors at the end of their high school years. Classes that are about things that will have an affect on your every day life are what will be most beneficial to seniors as they prepare to be on their own.— Brennan McCauley, Hoggard High School, NCHigh school seems like an “audition” for college but not the real world per say. I do believe that high school does not fully prepare us for college sometimes. College is almost like a whole different world and I believe that senior year should kind of be rebuilt. For instance, plan field trips to colleges to observe a class that some students are planning to take, take more pride is work-based learning, teach seniors more real world stuff and not how to find the x, y, and z axis of a graph. (Unless that’s the field students would like to go into.) I believe that, although we have career pathways, we need to have resources to be better prepared for college.— Hailey, GeorgiaOr, take time to finally pursue your passions.The author’s right. Students need to stop thinking about what others want from them, and instead focus on what they themselves want. Why live a life you can’t live? Take a semester to relax. Pursue your passions. Find your calling. Unfortunately, it might just be your only chance.— Hoke Pollock, Hoggard High School, NCSenior year should be about finding what you like. Your interests and abilities should be put to the test, and your brain could finally have a break. Seniors just don’t care about learning anymore, so maybe a change of pace, like interning in the same career field they want to go into, would be a perfect substitute!— Aubree Brown, Locust Grove High SchoolI agree with the author’s suggestion that senior year should kind of let students thing about their path and what they want to do in life. At Locust Grove, we have projects called capstones, which all seniors are required to do. They are student led projects that allow them to do something that they are passionate about. I think this a good opportunity for seniors, especially those who become disinterested and develop ¨senioritis¨ towards the end of the school year.— Jadyn B., LGHS__________In our Picture Prompt, “17-Foot Python,” we asked students to write a story or poem inspired by the photograph above.We loved the creative liberty they took with this real-world story, creating back stories for the people pictured and imagining adrenaline-inducing plots for how this photo came to be. Read on to see what they wrote.Dark. Wet. Red. Bite. Scream. Shake. Run.Dark. The landscape was covered with it. Only a sliver of the sun could be seen on the horizon. I had to be careful with my steps.Wet. I attempt to bypass the swampier parts of the area. No matter how hard I tried, mud still managed to get in my boots. There goes another pair of socks.Red. I see the flag, marking were we planted the bait. Three down, one to go. Then I can go to sleep, or eat a real breakfast.Bite. I bend down to get a closer look at the trap. The bait’s completely gone. Only pieces of dead scales remain. So I guess it really is a big one.Scream. A bird’s early call rings through the air. I flinch.Shake. I shiver, just a little bit. I try to tell myself that it’s the cold but that wouldn’t make sense. I’m in the midst of Florida summer.Run. I’m getting impatient now. I see the last flag. I get this and I’m home free. I feel something brush up against my leg. I freeze. I can see its eyes. I feel trapped in them. I see it preparing to strike.I run. I shake. I scream. It bites. There’s red. It’s wet. It’s dark.— Ashley Anderson, Hoggard High School, NCMonsterI search through these wet marsh lands. Me and my team of rehabilitation specialist have been searching for Burmese pythons which have been infesting the everglades of Florida. As I gently walk through the thick mud I hear a rustle in the shrubs, I pan my head in the direction I head the sound. At first I saw nothing but as I heard another rustle right where I was looking I saw it. I yelled for my team “I FOUND A HUGE ONE” they came running towards my way unaware of the massive beast I have just found. As they get to me I point out to the snake its giant body was thicker than my torso. My team looks at the snake all four of them gasping at the monster that had to be over fifteen feet. We started coming up with a plan on how to catch it, we had to think fast because at this time it was moving towards a body of water. We divert its attention by grabbing its tail, it didn’t like that. Through a long process of getting the pythons attention, dodging bites, and grabbing we finally managed to get the snake. After measuring it out we found out that it was seventeen feet long, we decided to take a picture with this monster. It took four of us just to hold it all up.— Wyatt Young, Hoggard High SchoolI’m lucky to be alive.It’s huge i’m telling you, The monster had to be at least 17 feet, You have to believe me, I’m lucky to be alive.I couldn’t believe my eyes when I saw it, I could see it staring back at me, Slithering its way towards me just for an appetizer, I’m lucky to be alive.The one time I wished I never went alone, Seeing my life flash before my eyes, Wondering if that beast was going to be the last thing I ever see, I’m lucky to be alive.I ran as fast as I can back to camp, Telling them the whole experience, They were all surprised and wanted to see it for themselves, But I was lucky to be alive.The creature was actually quiet calm, It didn’t put up a fight, Now if you don’t believe my story I have a picture to prove it, And you must admit i’m lucky to be alive.— Kyndal Sloan, Hoggard High SchoolVictoriousWalking through the tall grass in the open field, Blake shouts, “HOW MUCH LONGER,” to the three other rangers walking 70 yards ahead of him. “TWENTY MORE MINUTES.” Blake continues dragging his unseen feet as he trudged on. They come upon a large tree and stop, Blake finally catches up and they all glance at each other not daring to make a sound. They needed to find this python to be able to reopen the park. Each ranger scans the tree and the rest of the field. They all look different ways to prevent any surprise sightings of the python. Finally Blake spots the python in the field. He alerts the others and they slowly creep up behind. They execute their plan of grabbing the snake from behind and launching themselves over it to catch it in time. Everything goes according to plan and they each carry the python back to camp for a victorious picture.— Talia Porzio, Hoggard High School, Wilmington NCAdvertisement