https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/05/arts/music/playlist-halsey-mariah-carey-sheck-wes-alessia-cara.html
The Playlist: Sharon Van Etten Comes Back Strong, and 11 More New Songs - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
342
AdvertisementSupported byHear tracks by Halsey, Van Morrison, Alessia Cara and others.By Jon Pareles, Jon Caramanica and Giovanni RussonelloEvery Friday, pop critics for The New York Times weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing. Just want the music? Listen to the Playlist on Spotify here (or find our profile: nytimes). Like what you hear? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com and sign up for our Louder newsletter, a once-a-week blast of our pop music coverage.Assertiveness, not her usual melancholy introspection, marks “Comeback Kid,” which previews Sharon Van Etten’s first album since 2014, “Remind Me Tomorrow,” scheduled for January. (In between, she has been acting, writing soundtracks and becoming a mother.) A blustery, marchlike (but shifty) beat and pealing organ chords orchestrate an encounter between a “runaway” and a “comeback kid” — or maybe it’s an internal debate for someone re-entering the pop fray. “I’m not a runaway,” she insists. “It just feels that way.” JON PARELESThe frenetic beat that starts “Mogambo” comes from a dhol, a two-headed South Asian drum, as Riz MC — also known as the Pakistani-British actor Riz Ahmed and a member of the Swet Shop Boys — barks rhymes about post-colonial, bicultural pugnaciousness and pride: “They put their boots in our ground/I put my roots in their ground/And I put my truth in this sound/I spit my truth and it’s Brown.” “Mogambo,” named after a Bollywood movie villain, is a two-part track that slows down to a drone, a mixture of dhol and trap sounds and a lower, more glowering vocal delivery, with a stark refrain: “They wanna kill us all.” PARELESThe tautest musical ideas of Mothers, Kristine Leschper’s indie-rock band from Athens, Ga., converge and combust in “Pink” from “Render Another Ugly Method,” the album they released in September. An unremitting, motoric beat and an increasingly dissonant grid of math-rock guitar patterns carry Ms. Leschper’s terse lyrics, sketching an ambiguous but intense memory. PARELESOh, the ingratitude. In “Without Me,” the long-suffering Halsey lovingly rescues someone only to be cast aside when no longer needed. “Put you right back on your feet/Just so you could take advantage of me,” she sings, both accusatory and forlorn. With freeze-dried percussion sounds and Auto-Tuned vocals, the production may suit radio programmers but dehumanizes the song. Perhaps that leaves room for the inevitable amateur YouTube covers to reveal the song’s heartbreak. PARELESWelcome to Mariah Carey, the demo years. Which is to say, Ms. Carey was once a singer who thrilled with filigree — both in the ornate nature of her vocals, and also, in the middle of her career especially, with the density of her productions. But she is not a reliable hitmaker anymore, and she has endured some very public performance shortfalls in recent years. Given that, a return to basics is promising. “With You” is barely distracting — it moves slowly, gently, casually. Ms. Carey coos with authority, and pushes her voice just enough, but not too much. It feels like the template for a busier, more ambitious song, but for Ms. Carey, who still sings with authority, it is plenty. JON CARAMANICAA chipper and curiously sweet assessment of a toxic relationship by Alessia Cara. Over a production with extremely light flickers of rocksteady, Ms. Cara tsk-tsks the person who dragged her down: “Go get your praise from someone else/You did a number on my health.” Ms. Cara excels at rendering unsteady feeling smoothly, and this song, which on the surface seems to effortlessly bop and swing, is working hard to obscure the darkness within. CARAMANICAThe final song on “Mudboy,” the debut album by the “Mo Bamba” shouter Sheck Wes, is “Vetements Socks,” which begins tonally opposite from his breakout hit. The beat is soothing and languorous, and Sheck Wes raps with deliberate calm (in pace, not subject matter). But just when it begins to lull, or feel like a valedictory, he transitions into a double-time flow, and then into a yell. He’s not retreating. CARAMANICABy official count, “The Prophet Speaks,” due Dec. 7, will be Van Morrison’s 40th studio album. Like his other recent releases, its track list is full of old blues, soul and jazz songs. He’s backed, as he was on “You’re Driving Me Crazy” (released earlier this year), by the jazz keyboardist Joey DeFrancesco and his group. The title song, written by Mr. Morrison, is a minor-key blues with a rumba undercurrent, and he sings it with improvisatory aplomb. But it doesn’t just revisit his formative era. The lyrics ponder spiritual matters, while the arrangement — elusive acoustic guitar and Mr. DeFrancesco providing not only vaporous keyboard but also a muted, Miles Davis-tinged trumpet — beckons toward, if not into, the mystic. PARELESMaxwell takes his time. The trilogy of albums that he began in 2009 with “BLACKsummers’night” and belatedly continued in 2016 with “blackSUMMERS’night” is supposed to conclude, early in 2019, with “blacksummers’NIGHT.” It includes “Shame,” a pleading come-on full of apologies and second thoughts. The verses circle through three chords, rising and receding; Maxwell’s vocals echo to make the beat blurry and uncertain. And the words recall past misunderstandings and suspicions, desperately hoping that, “Maybe one day we’ll be more than we were way, way back when,” and longing, in the chorus, to “Feel no shame.” PARELESResidente has been on the defensive lately, blasting out answer songs at other Latin American rappers who bait or criticize him. His latest boast-cum-manifesto is “Rap Bruto” — “Raw Rap” — and it gives equal time to Nach, who has been recording hip-hop in Spain since the 1990s. (There are also background vocals from the Puerto Rican rapper Ivy Queen.) “Lots of jungle, few tigers,” the chorus taunts. Nach and then Residente proclaim their anti-commercial bona fides and their status as leaders, not followers: “All my lines are curves, I always break the rules,” Residente insists. Each rapper accelerates to hyperspeed for his final rhymes, while the music, by Trooko, cannily cranks up the tension and variation. PARELESAbout halfway through “Mild,” Jakob Bro’s thick-plumed electric guitar playing starts to surround itself. Through delay pedals and atmospheric effects, his lone plucks echo and hang in the air, merging with Thomas Morgan’s tawny acoustic bass and Joey Baron’s lightly ricocheting cymbals. Added to an otherwise pristine delivery, the cloudy interference forces you to work a little harder at sorting and making sense of all this casual beauty. “Mild” is the opening track from the Danish guitarist’s new trio album, “Bay of Rainbows,” his fourth effort for ECM. GIOVANNI RUSSONELLOIf Sartre made a noir flick, he’d have wanted Wayne Horvitz to score it. A Seattle-based pianist with downtown-New York credentials dating back to the 1980s, he writes with the blues in mind and a theatrical impulse only partway disguised. It’s there in “No Blood Relation #2,” one of 15 original tracks on “The Snowghost Sessions,” out Friday. RUSSONELLOJon Pareles has been The Times's chief pop music critic since 1988. A musician, he has played in rock bands, jazz groups and classical ensembles. He majored in music at Yale University.  @JonPareles Jon Caramanica is a pop music critic for The Times and the host of the Popcast. He also writes the men's Critical Shopper column for Styles. He previously worked for Vibe magazine, and has written for the Village Voice, Spin, XXL and more.  @joncaramanica Advertisement