https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/08/t-magazine/art/derrick-adams-television-art-show.html
An Art Show Inspired by Infomercials — and One Famous TV Psychic - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1176
AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie Baumgardner“Take the box and sell it,” demands the artist Derrick Adams of a group of 13 performers in his latest multidisciplinary adventure, “On” — and that’s the only direction he relays. In the resulting performance piece, they do just that: Talk up a box, contents unknown, in the manner of old-school infomercials. Adams calls the work a “series finale” of his ongoing reanimations of television culture, and in some ways it’s almost antithetical to the format of normal small-screen programming. Performers are mostly untrained (with the exception of a few burgeoning talents like Suzi Analog and Jahmir Duran Abreu), there is no script and the live performance, happening on Friday for the show’s opening, is entirely improvised, including Adams’s own act. The work is designed to allow the performers “to feel the space,” he says. “I want it to seem very fresh and not polished.” (See a teaser for the work, below.)“On” is also the title of Adams’s expansive new solo show, which fills in the grand hall of Red Hook’s experimental culture hub Pioneer Works. “The whole show is about a collage of stuff. It’s polished in the production of it, but the concept is about fabrication,” he says. “I have this philosophy of making art: I want people to see that I’m doing this, that it’s not manufactured.” Adams, 46, has plenty of opportunities to convey that during a very busy summer season: In addition to the Pioneer Works show, he has a series of exuberant paintings, “Culture Club,” at Gateway Project Spaces beneath Newark’s Penn Station; and he’ll unveil a billboard in Chicago for the “Messages in the Street” project this Sunday.The media, and television in particular, is an artistic preoccupation for Adams. “Our media contribution is our contribution to the world,” he says. “As an artist, you can redirect conversations, when you’re familiar of the structure and add on to it, and do things to it in a way that makes the viewer aware of certain mechanics that are happening within the mechanism that you may not think about when you look at TV.” One topic Adams particularly aims to shed light on is the way TV mediates the American experience of being black. “This type of show, where collage objects come together, really reflects black culture in America, because we have so many different extensions of identity,” he says. In “On,” Adams’s performers are “turning up the blackness to what you would see on television, which often simplifies certain elements of black culture — though to me, it complicates it.”As a marketing tool, TV magnifies “how significant the part of the black subject has played in the commodity of selling things,” Adams says — and his inquiry into that topic extends into the adjoining gallery rooms, which feature collage paintings made with vintage “TV Guide” covers, lamps topped with wigs and an extended, meditative riff on the famous ’90s television psychic Miss Cleo’s infomercials. “I have a love/hate relationship with media and television,” he says. “My practice in general is a middle way of meeting the viewer. I’m interested in form, function and formal aesthetics, but I’m also interested in people having fun and enjoying themselves.”“On” is on view from June 10 – July 17 at Pioneer Works, 159 Pioneer St., Brooklyn, pioneerworks.org.Advertisement