https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/11/opinion/campaign-stops/count-trump-among-the-takers.html
Opinion | Count Trump Among the Takers - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2703
AdvertisementSupported byBy Bryce CovertBecause Donald J. Trump hasn’t released his tax returns, we don’t know exactly what portion of his fortune he has sent the federal government. But in the second presidential debate, he confirmed that there were a number of years where he paid nothing at all.A week ago, The Times published his partial state tax returns from 1995 that show a substantial business loss that could have allowed him to avoid paying income taxes for nearly two decades. When asked by the moderator Anderson Cooper whether he indeed used the loss to get out of a tax bill, Mr. Trump replied, “Of course I do.”But rather than attempt to convince the American people that he had paid his fair share of taxes, Mr. Trump has vociferously defended the virtue of his ways, even arguing that paying nothing makes him fit to be president. “That makes me smart,” he retorted when presented with the idea during the first presidential debate. He told the Fox host Bill O’Reilly two days later, “A lot of people say, ‘That’s the kind of thinking that I want running this nation.’ ” He’s now calling it “brilliant.”Mr. Trump’s assertion that people should pay as little as they can in taxes — because, as he told Mr. O’Reilly, the government will “waste the money” — fits with quite an old conservative ideology. The government is bloated, inefficient and trampling on freedoms, the thinking goes; therefore, it deserves as little of our tax money to prop it up as possible. It’s no coincidence that Mr. Trump proposed a tax cut during the primary that was unprecedented, costing the government about double the revenue as would have been lost to Mitt Romney’s plan.But conservatives who want to starve the government actively obscure the reality of how it works.Americans like paying taxes just about as much as Mr. Trump does. Going back to 1957, a majority has said that their taxes are too high, consistently beating out those who feel that they’re just right — while virtually no one feels that they’re too low, no matter current rates.It’s not that Americans are all delinquents who don’t want to pay for the government functions they think are entirely appropriate. Many think they’re not getting anything in return. A poll from 2008 found that 94 percent of people who claimed they’d never used government assistance in fact had. Nearly everyone will benefit from the government at some point in their lives, be it through a mortgage tax deduction or Social Security check.It’s also that we’ve bought into the myths that we could get such things with a much smaller footprint and that we earn all our money without anyone’s help.Conservatives such as Ronald Reagan, Newt Gingrich and, more recently, Paul Ryan have subscribed to a worldview in which the government could easily step out of the way and allow private entities to provide those benefits. Few taxes would be needed to fund the government in that case. Social insurance against poverty and tragedy could be covered by charities, they argue; the stock market, for instance, could take care of Social Security.When people talk about this sort of society, they imagine that it used to work like this in some simpler, better time. But no such era ever existed, as Mike Konczal has written. From the Postal Service to the railroads to breaks for business investment, the government has always been involved in and supportive of private enterprise. America was built on it.While voluntary charitable organizations doled out most of the social insurance before the New Deal, they constituted a threadbare network that quickly snapped under the pressure of the Great Depression. The same happened during the Great Recession: Private charitable giving from individuals, corporations and foundations fell as the economy faltered; it was the government that stepped in to cushion the worst of the blows.Privatizing government functions doesn’t work much better. Mr. Ryan has released a number of proposals over the years to get the government out of Medicare and Social Security and push people instead into private markets. But analysis of his Medicare proposal found that people would end up paying more out of their own pockets, while costs would increase because private plans are more expensive. Exposing Social Security to the whims of the stock market could wipe out accounts when it took a serious downturn and would leave individuals to make smart enough investment choices so they had enough to live on in old age. The government, on the other hand, can do things cheaply and equitably.It’s worth noting that conservatives who urge people to shrink their tax bills are talking to only one group: the well off. There are already many low-income people who don’t pay federal income taxes because they make so little, yet those people have been characterized as “takers,” in the parlance of Mr. Ryan, and were infamously written off by Mr. Romney when he ran for president. It’s a stance Mr. Trump agreed with, arguing that a “large percentage” who don’t pay taxes “feel that they’re entitled.” It’s not smart for them to owe the government nothing; instead, that makes them lazy moochers.By contrast, the wealthy who reduce their tax bills are simply keeping more of what’s rightfully theirs. But that wrongly assumes that fortunes are built in isolation. Plenty of government resources help make fortunes possible: Taxes finance roads and waterways that transport materials to build factories or goods to stores. Public education produces a work force ready to fill jobs. The court system enforces contracts and cracks down on theft. As Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, put it in a now-famous video, “There is nobody in this country who got rich on his own.”Mr. Trump should know that fortunes don’t grow from individual efforts alone. Beyond the multimillion-dollar loan from his father that he insists was “small,” Trump built his New York real estate empire with at least $885 million in tax breaks, subsidies and grants that lowered his costs and increased profits. He himself has noted that some of the buildings he owns wouldn’t have been feasible without government help.Yet for all this largess, Trump has avoided paying dues through income taxes. It follows a pattern he pursues in his business dealings: According to hundreds of complaints, he has frequently contracted for goods and services, only to refuse to pay the bill in the end. He benefits from others’ labor and then turns around and stiffs small businesses and low-paid service workers. Mr. Trump thinks it’s smart to stiff the federal government, too.The founding fathers set up a system of taxation at the very beginning of the country. They are the duty that binds us to one another, investing in the government functions that we all rely on. Failing to pay them doesn’t make a rich man smart; it makes him ignorant of the way he’s benefited from that system.Bryce Covert (@brycecovert) is the economic policy editor at ThinkProgress and a contributor to The Nation.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.OpinionDavid BrooksOpinionDavid LeonhardtOpinionAndrew RosenthalOpinionThe Gregory Brothers and Joseph Gordon-LevittAdvertisement