https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/magazine/the-smutty-metaphor-queen-of-lawrence-kansas.html
The Smutty-Metaphor Queen of Lawrence, Kansas - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1237
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jesse LichtensteinJust before she took the microphone one soggy night in Portland, Ore., the poet Patricia Lockwood downed a shot of cheap bourbon. She had never had a drink right before a reading, but she often enacts some private joke when she speaks in public. It might be slurping her water loudly into the microphone, or rolling (instead of stepping) onto a stage, or, in this case, ingesting something that tasted to her like a puddle in a forest — anything to erase what she calls the “anxiety kegels” leading up to a performance.That evening, more than a hundred poetry fans — most of them in their 20s, most of them clutching cans of bargain beer — crowded into a corner of a 12,000-square-foot wood-and-metal shop as Lockwood began a 12-minute romp of a poem called “The Father and Mother of American Tit-Pics.”Lockwood is all large eyes, apple cheeks and pixie haircut — like an early Disney creation, perhaps a woodland creature; one of her fans recently rendered her as a My Little Pony. The contrast between how she presents and what she writes is something Lockwood delights in.“Emily Dickinson was the father of American poetry and Walt Whitman was the mother,” she read. “Walt Whitman nude, in the forest, staring deep into a still pool — the only means of taking tit-pics available at that time.”I laughed, like everyone else in the audience, and then settled in for a poem that re-envisioned two 19th-century pillars of American poetry through a kaleidoscope of contemporary obsessions. Occasionally, the sound of arc welding filled the silences between stanzas. It was, she later said, “the butchest I have ever felt.”Not long before this performance, a friend of mine introduced me to Lockwood’s work, handing me a copy of her first book, “Balloon Pop Outlaw Black,” which his small poetry press had just published. Large portions of it are meditations on the cartoon character Popeye. It would seem an unlikely candidate for a New Yorker critic’s end-of-the-year picks, yet it was, and it also became the best-selling small-press poetry book of 2013 (by a living poet), marking Lockwood as indie-poetry royalty. This week, her second collection of poems, “Motherland Fatherland Homelandsexuals,” comes out from Penguin, and in April, Lockwood announced the sale of her memoir to Riverhead.Most poets who publish with the top indie or trade publishers in the country teach at universities, and nearly all have taken advanced degrees — an M.F.A. or even a Ph.D. in creative writing. The effect of grad-school workshops on literature in the United States has been the subject of endless debate — the M.F.A. vs. N.Y.C. meme being the most recent variation on the theme. Lockwood has no M.F.A., she never even went to college. She married at 21, has scarcely ever held a job and, by her telling, seems to have spent her adult life in a Proustian attitude, writing for hours each day from her “desk-bed.” Now, at 32, Lockwood finds herself on the verge of literary fame, a product of ill fortune followed by good fortune and the perhaps naïve expectations of success that only an outsider can maintain.Lockwood, who goes by “Tricia,” may be best known for her persona on Twitter, where her steady stream of surreal, sexually explicit and often sexually impossible humor has won her 30,000 followers and a string of admirers in the world of comedy. Andy Richter, the longtime sidekick to Conan O’Brien, considers her a friend, though he has never met her offline: “She’s funny, she’s interesting and she’s a weirdo — which is all I ask for in a person.” Megan Amram, a writer for “Parks and Recreation,” came across Lockwood’s poetry first, relishing her ability to “heighten pop culture to saintly levels,” and then found her Twitter feed. “Both of us love the subversion of common sayings or verbal tropes,” Amram told me, “and we also love making fun of the way women are viewed as sex objects.” Rob Delaney, whom Comedy Central called “the funniest person on Twitter” and who has more than a million Twitter followers, heard about Lockwood from Amram. He “went insane,” he said, “and read everything by her.”Lockwood’s Twitter “sexts” — inspired by political scandals and cable-news stories on the sexual menace of cellphones — reimagine the sweaty-thumbed expression of a generation’s libido as a kind of gnomic poetry. She began composing the sexts in 2011, and soon online journals were compiling their favorites. The Huffington Post ran an article with the headline: “Patricia Lockwood’s Sext Poems Will Make You LOL.” Many are unprintable in these pages, but here’s a taste:Sext: I am a living male turtleneck. You are an art teacher in winter. You put your whole head through meSext: I give u the Heimlich maneuver when u don’t even need theHeimlich maneuver. A grape pops out of u that u never even ateSext: I am a water glass at the Inquisition. You are a dry pope mouth. Youpucker; I wet youLockwood has found that her Twitter fans have surprising patience with some of her longer and less accessible poems. “The idea about readers being too lazy to read poetry — they just need an in,” she said, “a voice they can trust.” Though Lockwood claims not to assert her politics in her poems, Don Share, the editor of the venerable Poetry magazine, in which she has been published, says that’s one of the most striking things about her work. “She’s right on top of politics, the economy, social situations, sexual situations, gender issues,” he says. “She converts the feed of information we get all day into these striking poems.”That was certainly the case last summer when her long poem called “Rape Joke” went viral as no contemporary poem has before or since. Lockwood and her husband, Jason Kendall, a newspaper editor, refer to the poem as “R. J.” She began writing it in the spring of 2012, drawing on a painful incident from her late teens. “It wasn’t because I felt a pressing need to write about my life,” she says. “It was because the form arrived to me, the vehicle arrived, and it felt so perfect — the anaphora, the repetition.” She laid a draft of the poem out in notes and then, as she often does, set it aside.That summer, during a stand-up set, the comedian Daniel Tosh went into an extended riff on rape jokes, which prompted a woman in the audience to shout, “Rape jokes are never funny.” Tosh’s response — “Wouldn’t it be funny if that girl got raped by, like, five guys right now?” — sparked a nationwide debate about taboos in comedy: Are there things we just can’t laugh about, and who is the “we” that gets to laugh and in what circumstances? While comedians, feminists, survivors of sexual violence and the usual pundits weighed in, Lockwood went back to the draft and finished the poem. She sent it to The Awl, an online magazine, where it sat for months.“The rape joke is that you were 19 years old,” the poem begins. “The rape joke is that he was your boyfriend.” And then the poem complicates itself — with a joke:The rape joke it wore a goatee. A goatee.Imagine a rape joke looking in the mirror, perfectly reflecting back itself,and grooming itself to look more like a rape joke. “Ahhh,” it thinks. “Yes.A goatee.”“It’s not a well-behaved poem,” Terrance Hayes, who selected the poem for the 2014 edition of “The Best American Poetry” series, told me. “It’s humor as we understand it from Richard Pryor, which is to say, there’s a blade at the heart of the joke, but there’s also a kind of suffering, and an awareness of that suffering, which gives it a kind of empathy for people who are exposed to it,” he said. “The whole poem is a big question, isn’t it?”The response to the poem was huge across Facebook, Tumblr and Twitter — Lockwood was getting hundreds of tweets a minute the morning it was posted. An article published later that day in Salon declared that Lockwood “may have the final word in the rape-joke debate.” The Guardian noted that even as she “casually reawakened a generation’s interest in poetry,” she had done something perhaps even more difficult. “She may well be the first person with an actual sense of humor to write an attack on rape jokes. Or is it actually a defense of rape jokes?” Either way, it would be a mistake to reduce the poem to a manifesto. “Rape Joke” refuses not to be funny, but it also refuses to let you take comfort in getting the joke.Later Lockwood tweeted: “The real final line of ‘Rape Joke’ is this. You don’t ever have to write about it. But if you do, you can write about it any way you want.”Lockwood was born in Fort Wayne, Ind., and was raised, as her author blurb states, in “all the worst cities of the Midwest.” What it does not say is that her father is a married Catholic priest, currently in a diocese of Kansas City, Mo. This requires a bit of explanation.Greg Lockwood married Lockwood’s mother, Karen, when they were both teenagers; he had just joined the Navy. Karen was raised Catholic, but Greg was an atheist. During one patrol, on a nuclear submarine off the coast of Norway, he underwent what he later described as “the deepest conversion on record.” He claims it grew out of soul-searching following several personal setbacks, but the family legend ascribes it to the fact that he and the crew on his previous patrol watched “The Exorcist” more than 70 times in 88 days. Whatever the catalyst, Lockwood became a devout Christian. He started a family, attended college and seminary and eventually was ordained as a Lutheran minister. And then one morning in 1985 he “woke up Catholic”; a few years later he became a priest, with the zeal of the twice-converted.In Lockwood’s telling, her father ruled the home as a loving and idiosyncratic patriarch who wore his cassock in the living room, or else very little — “It was either full regalia or nothing” — watched sword-and-sandal movies obsessively, played blues guitar, ate copious amounts of sausage and fed the family a steady dose of prog rock. Her mother was a more cautious presence who instituted family diets, watched her five children for signs of allergies and had a penchant for puns. The family calls her K-Rock; she claims to have known when Tricia was in the fourth grade that she was destined to be a writer.As a child Lockwood was intensely pious. “Catholicism is very beautiful,” she told me. “When your father is a priest, it’s invested with extra authority, and your father is invested with extra authority.” As a teenager, she had a strict dress code and a very limited range of after-school activities, which included a youth group called God’s Gang. “There was a lot of talk about gangs at the time,” she recalled, “and the idea was, what if there was a gang but it was a cool gang — for the Lord?” In God’s Gang they spoke in tongues, and the leaders would outline “all the sex you can’t do.”The family moved frequently within the dioceses of St. Louis and Cincinnati. Lockwood lived in at least five different rectories and attended six different schools, all of them Catholic. Her literary education was heavy on rules, and at home the reading was pretty much limited to “Tennyson, encyclicals and Tom Clancy novels.” But from age 16 she was always at work on a manuscript. These were intensely serious attempts to link Greek mythology to Catholic liturgy, much like the life’s work of Edward Casaubon, the dry old cleric in George Eliot’s “Middlemarch.” “It’s what 16-year-olds do,” she said. “Well, that’s not what 16-year-olds do; they fondle each other. I was fondling the Greek myths. You have to have some outlet. I was a hot teen Casaubon.” At some point, the faith that defined her childhood simply vanished. “Like virginity, you wake up one day without it.”While in high school in Cincinnati, she encountered in an anthology a poem that was actually funny and learned that its author, Kenneth Koch, was a Cincinnati native. Koch — a fixture of the New York School, friend and contemporary of John Ashbery and Frank O’Hara — came to read at a public library in town and Lockwood went to hear him, asking a question in the session that followed. She wasn’t surprised that he singled her out to talk with afterward. She was 18 and a poet. “You just expect that the world will notice you,” she said.Lockwood planned on studying literature at St. Johns College in Annapolis, but on Christmas Eve before her first semester, her father dropped a bombshell: they couldn’t afford to send her. “It tells you something about my relationship to authority,” she said. “I didn’t even think I should try to get loans. I just thought, That’s that.”She moved into an abandoned convent near her parents’ rectory, briefly got a job in a bookshop and hung out with what she describes as “a lesbian wolf pack — I was allowed to go feral for the first time.”She also began posting on poetry message boards. It was there, online, that her poetry caught the eye of Kendall, a child of two missionaries who spent formative years in Thailand and Korea but who was by then living in Colorado and writing poems. The two corresponded and eventually began talking on the phone. At some point Kendall decided to drive to Cincinnati to meet her. “This was when it was still weird to meet on the Internet,” Lockwood said. He was 20 years old. She was 19, but he thought that with a name like Patricia, she was probably older.When the distant suitor arrived and met Lockwood’s family, he found her father upstairs in the TV room, cleaning his handgun. The first thing Greg Lockwood said to Kendall was: “Give me your driver’s license. I’ve got cop friends.”Father Lockwood eventually married them. The couple moved to Colorado Springs, where Patricia set to work on a novel. Their apartment looked out on a majestic park, Garden of the Gods, but she moved her desk into a closet so she wouldn’t be distracted by the view. With the hubris of a 20-year-old, she sent the finished novel to the top literary agents in New York. There was interest, and soon she had major literary representation.The book was called “The History of Opposable Thumbs,” and it was unusual material. “Great novels have incest; if not, they’re not good,” Lockwood told me. “William Faulkner taught us that.” She and Kendall had high hopes, but the novel languished, and she was eventually told that, “in the climate after 9/11, people aren’t willing to take a chance on sister-on-sister action where someone loses a hand to gangrene.” The book fell off the map. “If something doesn’t get published,” Lockwood said, “I’m like a bear leaving scat in the woods. I move on.”Over the next eight years, Kendall, who no longer wrote poetry, worked as a reporter, designer and editor at local newspapers in New Hampshire, Florida and Georgia. During that time, Lockwood was employed for four months at a Florida diner, where she mostly wrote poems on her order pad. Lockwood still planned to go to college, but in the meantime she undertook her own literary education, reading widely and voraciously — modernists like Wallace Stevens, Marianne Moore and T.S. Eliot; the aphorist Jules Renard and the essayist Michel de Montaigne; and piles of comic books, particularly the escapades of Scrooge McDuck. “I wasn’t concerned about taste,” she says. “I wanted to know things.” They lived frugally; she read and wrote, he went to work and took on the role of her manager, salvaging many of her poems from the wastebasket, submitting them to journals when she was disinclined to and maintaining a spreadsheet to track their efforts. “We blitzed everybody,” he said. “We started blasting people with her stuff.” The blitz went on for years. Eventually a poem was accepted by Poetry (Submission No. 179) and then The New Yorker (Submission No. 240), and that changed everything.After five years in Florida, the couple found a home in Savannah, Ga. Kendall was working as a features editor at The Savannah Morning News. Lockwood had recently published her first poem in The New Yorker. And then Kendall began to notice something wrong with his vision; he was having trouble reading at work. An ophthalmologist found advanced cataracts on both eyes — quite rare for a healthy 30-year-old. If they progressed, he was told, the surgery could become too risky, and he would potentially lose his eyesight. Their health insurance didn’t cover the whole cost of the procedure, leaving them roughly $10,000 short. Desperate, Lockwood shared their predicament with her Twitter followers. Her online friends urged her to set up a PayPal account. At 11 p.m. one night, she tweeted that the account was up, and by 11 a.m. the next day they had raised the entire sum.“It was shocking,” Kendall said. “How can people be so cool?”“Everyone except for a few people donated in small amounts,” Lockwood said. “Things like $4.20 or $6.66, people with user names like theslavekitten.”Kendall had five surgeries. His recovery was slow, and eventually he had to face the reality that until he healed completely, he couldn’t do a job that required him to stare at a computer all day. Suddenly he and Lockwood were without a livelihood.With few other options, they put their possessions in storage and moved into a 10-by-14 upstairs bedroom in her father’s modest brick rectory in Kansas City: a married couple in their 30s living across the hall from the priest and his wife.With Kendall recuperating and with no income, Lockwood had to choose between finding a job or writing a book she could sell. She began a memoir, an attempt at flat-out funny prose, no 140-character limits, no line breaks. Between the interruptions of her father, dressed in his cassock and jamming on one of his left-handed guitars or shouting at the Cincinnati Bengals on TV, she traced her life thus far.She was still living in the rectory when “Rape Joke” was published in The Awl. There is a section of the poem about the speaker’s parents’ response to the rape:It was a year before you told your parents, because he was like a son tothem. The rape joke is that when you told your father, he made the signof the cross over you and said, “I absolve you of your sins, in the nameof the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. . . .”Lockwood came downstairs one night after the poem was published to find her mother sitting in the dark in front of her computer, reading the poem and crying. Her mother hugged her and said, “It’s O.K., you’re still standing.” But she had also read some of the ugly comments left on The Awl’s website — “oh, get over yourself, you attention whore . . . no one feels bad for you. you’re the rape joke.”“Do you see what these people were saying about you?” her mother asked.“Mom, it’s O.K.,” Lockwood said. “It’s just the Internet.”Of her parents’ reaction to the rape, she later said: “People don’t necessarily respond as their best selves in the moment. The initial conversations were not totally ideal. But when you make art out of something, they get another chance.”Today, Lockwood and Kendall live on the ground floor of a Cape Cod-style house on the east side of Lawrence, Kan., a 30-minute drive from her parents. When I visited in April, they had been there for just three months, and Lockwood didn’t know her own address. She handed the phone to Kendall to give me directions. Kendall now works as an editor for the newspaper in Lawrence and was able to cover the $600 a month rent for the house, which was sparsely furnished and adorned with action figures, Popeye and Olive Oyl throw pillows and a surprisingly heavy statuette of Chaim Topol as Tevye in “Fiddler on the Roof.”Behind the house, trees line a creek named for William S. Burroughs, the literary patron of Lawrence. Lockwood likes to sit in a room at the back of the house in the afternoons, looking out the window and going into her own head. Some evenings, a skunk emerges from the Burroughs Creek bank and locks eyes with her before disappearing under the house. She feels as if they have forged a bond and calls the animal Big Boi, after one of her favorite rappers.We took a walk along the Burroughs trail and up into the heart of Lawrence’s old downtown and talked about her poetry. “Whenever anyone asks me about process,” she said, “I’m like a cat stroked the wrong way: Get away from my belly!” But she is fundamentally a sharer, a poet for the age of sharing. “I’m verbally incontinent — anything just pours out of me,” she said. “My father’s that way. He doesn’t worry about it. My mother does. I got both. I say just the worst things the English language is capable of, and then later on I lie awake at night thinking, Oh, Tricia, you’ve done it again.”Lockwood’s poems are most radical in their ability to convey the essential strangeness of sex and gender. “I consistently felt myself to be not male or female,” she said, “but the 11-year-old gender: protagonist. Maybe it’s a byproduct of reading a lot of books, of projecting yourself into different bodies. As an early teen, I thought I presented as androgynous, which was not true. But I had a short haircut, and I felt androgynous.”There was no discussion of sex in the home growing up. She ascribes the birth of her own sexual knowledge to a road trip with her aunt when they listened to Jean Auel’s “The Valley of Horses.” “We’re driving along the Grand Canyon, the hugest vagina in the world, and my aunt is playing the audiobook of cave-man sex. I just pretended to be asleep or she’d turn it off.”We stopped for a moment at a picnic bench in an idyllic city park. “I blush if I see people kissing in a movie,” she said. “There are certain cusses I can’t say. It’s a private joke: I’m a puritan. I was a child bride. There’s this prim, prudish part of me, and in order to get past that, I just have to push all the way.” As she spoke, an elderly couple walked along a nearby path, a young woman danced with a hula hoop near a fountain and a squirrel darted away from us toward a tree just beginning to leaf. “Nothing I say is actually physically possible on any plane of existence,” Lockwood added, watching the squirrel. “I may want to French a squirrel, but I can’t. It would be hard to catch. Rabies. Too much fur.”Many of the titles of the poems in the new collection, “Motherland Fatherland Homelandsexuals,” rival click bait in their demand to be read: “Is Your Country a He or a She in Your Mouth,” “He Marries the Stuffed-Owl Exhibit,” “Search ‘Lizard Vagina’ and You Shall Find,” “Nessie Wants to Watch Herself Doing It.” One poem traces the evolution of generic doe-eyed deer named Bambi into generic women named Fawn, with their “light shafts of long blond hair and long legs.” Yet the book, for all its playfulness, poses sharp challenges to many stereotypes, particularly those around gender. “List of Cross-Dressing Soldiers” starts with famous women who dressed as men and fought in battles, but then shifts closer to home. Lockwood’s younger brother, Paul, is a Marine who has served two tours in Iraq and one in Afghanistan. “We would always have dreams and then hear that something bad had happened near him,” she said. The poem touches on these close calls:My brother is alive because of a family capacityfor little hairs rising on the back of the neck.“He’d always say, ‘I’m not going to go back’ and then do another tour,” Lockwood said. “The last tour in Afghanistan was tough. He just missed being exploded by an I.E.D. He lost buddies.” Yet what drew her into the poem was the interaction between her brother and his fellow Marines.. . . “Kisses,” he writes to a friend.His friend he writes back, “Cuddles.” Bunch of girls,bunch of girls. They write each other, “Miss you,brother.” Bunch of girls, bunch of girls. They passedthe hours with ticklefights. They grew their mustachestogether. They lost their hearts to local dogs,what a bunch of girls.“It’s such a macho culture,” she said, “but also the most affectionate male culture I’ve ever encountered. Sitting on each other’s laps, stroking each other’s faces. It’s very sweet. But at the same time it’s, ‘Be a man!’ ”She didn’t think her brother would read the book. “He’s just proud that you’ve done it,” she said. “Same with my dad.” Her father has never heard her read her poems. “I stay away and let her do what she needs to do with her life,” Father Lockwood told me one evening during a visit to the rectory in Kansas City. “She’s crazy smart and very talented. Good theology teaches you that everyone belongs to themselves.” Then he turned to his daughter and said, “You come from us, but you’re not us.”To Lockwood, that distinction was more mystery than theology. “I have this hall-monitor mother,” she told me later, “and this psycho freakout prog-rock dad just doing whatever he wants; he doesn’t even obey any laws except the laws of the church, and I came out. I’m not even sure how it happened.”One afternoon during my visit to Lawrence, Lockwood and Kendall were in the side yard of their house, he drinking wine on the grass, she finishing a shot of vodka while sitting on a swing suspended from a large tree. At some point, a hare emerged from the Burroughs Creek bank and watched them — Thumper checking in on old friends. The conversation turned to whether she ever felt the lack of a college education.“A nice byproduct of never going to college,” she said, “is that I’m never embarrassed about not knowing something. I’m missing such large areas. If you looked at my brain, it would be like those taxi drivers who have one huge lobe that just contains directions, except for me it would be metaphors. I felt like I had a freak ability.”“Like you’re a good singer,” Kendall said.Writing in Salon recently, Laura Miller drew attention to “a handful of great literary husbands” whose support enabled the likes of Virginia Woolf and George Eliot to produce great works: “It took an extraordinary man to acknowledge the superior gifts of his wife and to devote himself to bringing them to fruition.”Kendall saw something from the start in those message boards. “I’m going to work and she’s going to write all day — when you are marrying a genius, that’s the deal,” he said, watching her on the swing. “It’s like marrying Aretha Franklin. She’s going to get to sing. If you hear Aretha Franklin sing — ”“This is so grandiose,” Lockwood interrupted.“ — you understand what’s going on musically. Whoever was the first person to hear Aretha sing, understood. I just happened to be the first.”Last month, Lockwood and Kendall traveled to New York City. It was the first time for Lockwood. She was scheduled to give two readings and meet her poetry editor, as well as the editor of her memoir. Like true Midwesterners, they rented a car and drove all over Manhattan and Brooklyn.On Saturday she was to be part of a distinguished poetry event with a number of well-known older poets at Sarah Lawrence College. The rest of her trip, including her birthday, would prove to be a comedy of errors — pants ripped on a bench, maxed-out credit-card (the memoir money hadn’t come in yet), passing out in a hot tub. “My disaster birthday,” as she would describe it to me. But Friday night, the young and clever of Brooklyn packed the Morgan Town Bar in Bushwick, where Lockwood was headlining a long bill of “Internet comedy writers.”She gamely waited through seven other acts, laughing at the funny bits, smiling through the rest. Many people came up to talk to her — five minutes into a conversation they might reveal their Twitter handles, at which point her eyes sparked with recognition and she hugged them. One young man approached Kendall to introduce himself and ask about his eyes — he had contributed to the surgery fund.At last, Lockwood’s turn came and, in a gray top and skirt that she had selected at the Goodwill in Lawrence, she did an impromptu barrel roll onto the stage for her private, nerve-calming joke. The piece she was about to read was a true story of a mother-daughter road trip interrupted by the discovery of less-than-spotless bed linens at a Nashville hotel chain. It’s about the moment when you and your mother first say to each other a slang word for a bodily fluid, at which point, she said, “there’s no going back.” The title of the piece can only be rendered in these pages as “The Semen Queens of Hyatt Place.”Back in Kansas, she had already read it to her mother, who laughed out loud. In Brooklyn, they did the same.Advertisement