https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/05/sports/colton-herta-indycar.html
This Teenager Drives Very Fast. And Nobody Is Telling Colton Herta to Slow Down. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2504
AdvertisementSupported byBy Dave CaldwellRacing has long been a big part of Colton Herta’s family life, so it was not much of a surprise when he took after his IndyCar-driving father and began racing go-karts as a boy.What was a surprise, to him and everyone else: winning an IndyCar Series race six days before his 19th birthday. Herta, who still lives at home in Southern California with his parents, recently became the youngest winner in the history of the sport’s top level.Herta led the last 15 laps to win a race on March 24 at Circuit of the Americas in Austin, Tex. It was only his third IndyCar Series race, but the victory was no fluke: He qualified to start fourth in the 24-car field, and he held off the pack after Will Power’s car broke down.Herta’s father, Bryan, 48, won four races and drove in the Indianapolis 500 five times. He was at the track to call strategy for the scion of another racing family — Marco Andretti, grandson of Mario — and was stunned at how quickly his own son had won a race.“You’d be foolish to put that kind of expectation on anybody,” Bryan Herta said.Colton Herta, meanwhile, is tied to a family that made its name in a different sport. One of his car’s owners is George M. Steinbrenner IV, the 22-year-old grandson of George M. Steinbrenner, the principal owner of the Yankees from 1973 until his death in 2010.When Herta took the checkered flag at Austin, Steinbrenner became the youngest owner to win a race in the IndyCar Series. Steinbrenner did not just team up with Herta: The two race buffs have known each other for at least 10 years, Herta said.“We sort of had the same desire to make it in IndyCar,” said Steinbrenner, whose father, Hank, is a Yankees part-owner and co-chairman. “We thought we could do it together.”As ecstatic as the team was to win in Austin, Herta said, “It’s kind of a freak situation with how young the team is.”And it was just the second IndyCar Series race for the team, Harding Steinbrenner Racing.But Steinbrenner’s partner, Mike Harding, an Indianapolis asphalt and concrete contractor, wasn’t that surprised.“I think he’s going to be a superstar” owner, Harding said.Steinbrenner was an intern in 2016 for Bryan Herta’s race team, which won the Indianapolis 500 with Alex Rossi, an American driver.Steinbrenner learned enough from Herta to realize that he wanted his own race team. With help from Michael Andretti, Marco’s father, Steinbrenner decided to field a car in the Indy Lights second-tier series in 2017. And after two years of racing in Europe, Colton Herta wanted to come back to the United States.“George probably wouldn’t have hired me if he didn’t think I could win,” Herta said. “He gave me my start. I have a lot of loyalty to him. He’s been good to me.”Steinbrenner acknowledged that his last name “draws a lot of attention and expectations.” He added: “My family’s history in sports is one of success. That’s a precedent my grandfather set. It’s one that can’t be ignored. It’s what he would expect.”But he also said, “It would be best for us, still being new to the series, to not shift our focus or expectations too much.”In the 2017 and 2018 seasons, Herta and Steinbrenner teamed to win six of 33 Indy Lights races, with 20 top-three finishes. Herta won his second Indy Lights race, in St. Petersburg, Fla., and Bryan Herta remembered tearing up after his son’s victory.Colton Herta drove in one IndyCar Series race last season, finishing 20th among 25 cars. Steinbrenner and Harding became partners last September, with a plan to enter the IndyCar Series full time in 2019.Herta started 11th but finished eighth in the season opener on March 10 in a road race in St. Petersburg. Herta, Harding and Steinbrenner thought they could do well in the race on the road course at Austin, after they had an encouraging test session there in February. Herta had also driven on the team that won its class in January at the Rolex 24 at Daytona.Bryan Herta said of his son: “He doesn’t get too up or too down. He’s been very emotionally level his whole life. He’s really good at hitting reset.”The next IndyCar Series race is Sunday at Barber Motorsports Park in Birmingham, Ala., another road course, and Herta would seem to have a good chance to win again.The rookie driver and rookie team still need to qualify in May for the sport’s ultimate race, the Indianapolis 500. And the competition in the series remains formidable. The car owned by Bryan Herta and driven by Marco Andretti finished sixth at Austin, 19 seconds off the pace set by Colton Herta.After Colton’s big win, Bryan Herta said his son was more excited than he had ever seen him as a driver.Days later, Colton had calmed down. “We realize we’re still coming together as a team,” he said. “We want to make sure it wasn’t a freak incident that happened with winning a race.”Advertisement