https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/24/magazine/erdogans-people.html
The Erdogan Loyalists and the Syrian Refugees - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1105
FeatureFaced with an influx of new Arab neighbors, a conservative neighborhood in Istanbul struggles with the question of what it means to be a Turk.The Monday bazaar on Professor Naci Sensoy Street.CreditCreditLynsey Addario for The New York TimesSupported byBy Suzy HansenIn an old part of Istanbul, in a district named Fatih for the Muslim conqueror, tucked inside ancient Byzantine walls in a neighborhood known as Karagumruk, there is a narrow barbershop with pistachio green and glittery countertops called Golden Scissors. When I visited one evening in late June, during Ramadan, every chair was occupied. The religious holiday this year required 17 straight hours of daily abstinence from eating, drinking, smoking or having sex, so just before breaking fast, at the sunset hour, a happy madness set in. Out on the street, women rushed by laden with bags; spaghetti-limbed boys, delirious with hunger and hormones, threw balls against the wall, sometimes at people’s heads. Inside Golden Scissors, men visited for a trim or a cut, given by an excitable man of 40 named Murat, who wore the long, straight beard, full-bodied pants and fez-shaped cap often seen on the devout. He was talking about the events of the previous night when Istanbul’s main airport was bombed.“We’re very sad,” Murat said. “There’s not much else to feel. The terrorists hit the international terminal. It’s not against us.”One of the barbershop’s windows, painted with a transliteration of the Quran’s opening words — bismillahirrahmanirrahim, “In the name of God, the most Merciful, the most Compassionate” — looked out on to the neighborhood’s main drag, Professor Naci Sensoy Street. It was like all of Karagumruk’s streets: so narrow and intimate that the pastel-colored apartments, ramshackle buildings and storefronts seemed poised to embrace. Fruit and vegetable stands spilled onto the sidewalk with their piles of strawberries, cucumbers and bananas. Men sat in groups outside on footstools, and everyone walked down the middle of the street, where the weight of a thousand eyes produces a strange feeling of both protection and surveillance. Yet Karagumruk is also known as a rough-and-tumble place of nationalistic attitudes, small-time mafias, jittery drug addicts and gunfire in the night.Karagumruk lies within the larger district of Fatih, an AK Party stronghold, intensely loyal to its leader and Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. During the recent coup attempt against Erdogan’s government, after the Ministry of Religious Affairs sent texts to imams to issue a special call to prayer, all of Fatih exploded out onto the wide-laned Vatan Avenue, a couple blocks from Karagumruk. Murat put down his newborn child to join the crowd, which included men of all ages, even little boys. When a helicopter began to hover near the AK Party headquarters in Fatih, 10 minutes from Karagumruk, the protesters rushed it, preventing it from landing. As it pulled away, it fired into the crowd, killing at least one protester and injuring others. When I asked Murat why he and his neighbors took to the streets — for Islam? for Erdogan? — he replied, “Erdogan is Islam, and Islam is Erdogan.”The AK Party runs the municipality, and Fatih residents abide by Erdogan’s Islamic lifestyle. Islamist demonstrations often take place at the grand Fatih mosque. Turks in Fatih tend to take Erdogan’s side in all his knotted-up foreign and domestic entanglements, not just the failed coup but his disputes with Russia, his tortured relations with America, his brutal conflict with the Kurds, his leniency toward jihadist fighters passing through Turkey to take part in Syria’s civil war, his horse trading with the European Union over refugees fleeing Syria. This dangerous new role for Turkey in the Middle East had further alienated the political opposition, including elements in the military.Over the last five years, Erdogan wound up allowing millions of Syrians, most of whom are Arabs, into Turkey. The newcomers seem foreign to most Turks, but the two peoples have memories of an ancestral divorce: One hundred years ago, the Turks ruled the Arabs as part of the Ottoman Empire, and when the empire split up, Ataturk, Turkey’s founder, in part defined the new country in opposition to the Arab world. He famously regarded Arabs as beneath Turks, and Arabs probably felt little affection for the Turks’ enduring imperiousness. Today they can barely communicate with each other: Turks don’t speak Arabic, and Syrians don’t speak Turkish. They live together but also apart.Since 2012, Professor Naci Sensoy Street had filled up with Syrian shops, perhaps a third of the total. I knew by then, having spent months visiting Karagumruk, that some Turks living there weren’t happy about it. I asked those in the barbershop whether attacks in Turkey spurred any Turks in the neighborhood to take out their anger on the refugees, as had happened in the West.A Syrian barber had been cutting hair silently, too wary to talk, but now the rest of the barbershop fell silent. Then Murat exclaimed: “The Syrians have nothing to do with this, ya! A people driven from their homeland — how can they be a terrorist? One or two people do something and it’s attributed to a whole nation, ya. This kind of mindlessness must stop.”I began spending time in Karagumruk because I wanted to understand how ordinary Turks were dealing with a refugee crisis far greater, in terms of numbers, than what was roiling politics throughout the rest of Europe. Whether the Syrians wanted to stay or not, it seemed the Turks were preparing to let them: Not long before the failed coup, Erdogan said he was considering a plan to offer citizenship to at least some refugees. Somehow the Syrians fit into Erdogan’s vision of Turkey, and his people seemed willing to consider it. The influx of refugees, I found, was making the Turks of Karagumruk rethink how they viewed their country, their history and even themselves.I first visited Karagumruk last October, often going to a small white shed not much larger than a child’s playhouse, which sits behind a fence and a rare patch of green grass. This is the office of Karagumruk’s muhtar, a man with a wide fleshy face and a boxer’s body named Ismail Altintoprak. A muhtar is a kind of village chief, politically neutral and always in demand: registering birth certificates, listening to neighbors whine, answering a mother who asks about the suspicious origins of the boy who wants to marry her daughter. In the summers, Altintoprak raises four chickens and a rooster, which strut and squawk in the yard and even inside the office. At 68, he has been the elected muhtar of Karagumruk for 30 years, and his family, he says, has been in Istanbul since the 1700s, so he’s prone to the long memory and oppressive nostalgia particular to all things Constantinople — especially when I ask him what has happened to Karagumruk and to Turkey.To the muhtar, the Karagumruk of old was a bucolic place: Ottoman houses made of wood, green-grass yards with “pools of golden fishes,” mosques from which every call to prayer was beautiful (not some scratchy recording) and Turks who loved their neighbors, especially if they were Greek or Armenian. The muhtar describes his own lineage as Tatar, and he is Muslim, but he says the Christians and Muslims once all got along because they were real city people, real Istanbullu, which, in his usage, appears to be code for “sophisticated,” or anyone who already inhabited Istanbul before the strangers arrived.“This was a Greek neighborhood, ya!” Altintoprak said. “People say Christians were the Muslims’ enemies? What are you talking about? There are good guys and bad guys. I am coming from the Ottoman era! If someone is human, they are human, what can you do? In my time, the Greeks gave a Turkish guy in the neighborhood the nickname of Aleko, a Greek name, and he didn’t care! Today, if you said, ‘Hey, Petro!’ someone would shoot you.”In the 1950s, riots, attacks and prejudice drove away nearly all of the remaining Greeks and Armenians, just as millions of Turkish migrants were arriving in Istanbul from the eastern part of the country. External migrants came too: Bulgarians, Bosnians, Macedonians. At least all these newcomers could, according to the rules of the imagined community of the time, be considered “Turks.” But it has been a different story when it comes to the new Arab arrivals, the latest of the former Ottoman subjects to seek shelter in the old imperial home.Syrians who made their way to Karagumruk told me it reminded them of Damascus. Many of them settled nearby in an area that had once been the site of one of the oldest Roma settlements in the world, Sulukule, before it was torn down amid controversy in the 2000s and replaced with state-subsidized townhouses. These looked fancy but were deficient — windows that didn’t open, finicky plumbing, oddly dangerous patios — and failed to attract Turkish renters. When the Syrians came, the landlords increased the rents unfairly, but some tenants crammed a dozen beds into single apartments and made Sulukule home.A crowd in Istanbul watched President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, speaking on July 1, several days after suicide bombers attacked Istanbul Ataturk Airport, killing at least 44 people and wounding hundreds of others.In 2012, a year after the civil war in Syria began, a young Syrian man opened a coffee shop on Professor Naci Sensoy Street. From one bin, he sold the shiny black beans favored in Syria; from the other, the dry brown beans preferred in Turkey. Each month he paid a small bribe to local toughs to let him stay. Then came the Zain barbershop, the Syrian sweets shop El Nour, the Syrian chicken-kebab place and a Syrian secondhand furniture store. In Istanbul, it is common to see shops proclaiming where in Turkey the owners come from: the Van Breakfast House (the city of Van), the Erzincan Meat and Chicken Market (the city of Erzincan). Hometown is important — “where are you from?” is one of the first questions Turks ask one another — but you don’t very often see references to places outside Turkey: the Sofia Coffeehouse, say, or, heaven forbid, Athens Baklava. And yet in just three years, almost every other shop on the long Professor Naci Sensoy Street was strung with Arabic script. The Syrian coffee shop called itself Al-Helebi, for the city of Aleppo.“A lot of them started businesses,” the muhtar told me one October day in his office. Turks seemed both impressed and miffed by the Syrians’ confidence, when they weren’t complaining about the Syrians who were begging. “They don’t help each other! Instead, they’re always asking for help from Turks. ... Go outside: There are five children asking for money.”Altintoprak’s comments seemed to liberate a woman who was waiting for him. “They are dirty,” she said. “They do their washing before prayers in the kitchen. I live next to a Syrian family. And in the same place they eat and prepare food, they wash their feet before prayers.”Turks have high standards of cleanliness. Kitchen rags cannot be put in washing machines; cleaning women risk their lives on the ledges of fifth-floor apartments to scrub the windows. All of which is to say, calling something dirty is inordinately common in Turkish commentary. But it also connotes backwardness, and thus you hear nasty comments about the “dirty” Kurds or the “dirty” Arabs — that is, the Middle Eastern peoples whom the Turks imagine they left behind when Ataturk came along and pushed them westward.The woman was still going on about the feet when a well-dressed boy walked in speaking perfect Turkish. He had the bravado of someone who had drawn up his courage only recently.“Salaam alaikum, take it easy,” the boy said. “Brother, how do I get to, do you know, I can’t read this. …” He held out a piece of paper.The muhtar sized him up. “Are you Syrian?”“Iraqi.”The muhtar stared at him blankly for a moment before he snatched the paper, scribbled and gave precise and patient directions.“Thank you, brother, I’ll do as you say,” said the boy, using all the correct Turkish expressions that it took me many years to learn.The muhtar followed the boy’s back with his eyes as he left and took up where he left off as if the polite, Turkish-speaking, salaam-alaikum-saying Arab boy had never existed.“They never even say ‘salaam alaikum’!” Altintoprak said. “If you are asking me for things, why won’t you say hello!”If the complaints could be unpleasant — the Syrians caused the rent to go up, the Syrians caused wages to go down, the Syrians don’t pay taxes, the Syrians are taking all our jobs — it nonetheless suggested a kind of integration. In this tiny patch of Istanbul, at least, the Syrians were included in the timeless neighborhood tradition of dedikodu, or gossip, which spares no one but usually falls hardest on whichever group arrived last.Down the street from Altintoprak’s office, a shopkeeper joked, “If the Syrians keep coming here, pretty soon we’re going to have to go live there!” Then he continued seriously: “I hired some Syrians once. They are lazy. Why don’t they work harder? If they come to a foreign country and you’re supposed to feed your family, you should be ambitious. And they’re not. They are always checking their watches, asking how long they have to work.”A customer of indiscernible origin asked if he could join the conversation. “They are not all the same,” he said. “They’re fighting a terrible war. How can a Muslim do this to a Muslim? And then we try to cheat them. They try to work here and are never justly paid.”The shop owner mulled this over. “Why don’t they send their families here and stay in Syria to defend their country?” he asked.The customer seemed to take this notion very seriously, and in fact it is a common one in Karagumruk: Many Turkish men believe that, because Turks fought and liberated their country from the Western powers after World War I, Syrian men should have stayed behind and fought for their nation, too.“You say that, but we ourselves have had a war within our country for 30 years,” the customer countered, though it had being going on closer to 40. “Have you ever fought for your country against the Kurds?”Silence followed. After the stranger walked out, the shop owner and his employee whispered. One said, “I guess he might be Syrian?”“Must be,” the other said.“Look, let me tell you,” another customer piped up. “I am from Mardin” — a Turkish city near the Syrian border that is Arabic, Kurdish and Turkish — “Arabs are the worst. You can’t trust them. If we went to their country, they would take everything from us! Remember during the period between the Ottoman and Republican eras?” He meant when the Arabs fought for their independence. “They stabbed us in the back! I know them. You can never trust Arabs. They are traitors.”If we went there, believe me, they would oppress us, I heard the people of Karagumruk say. But we Turks, we’re not like that.The stereotypes of Arabs that are held by Turks are rooted in history, especially the trauma of World War I. It was the Turks, as Ottomans, who ruled the Arabs for hundreds of years. Then there was the war, followed by the retreat into individual states — until recently, when war again broke things apart and thrust them back together.While Turkey is a signatory to the 1951 United Nations convention on the Status of Refugees, it retains a “geographic limitation,” which means that Turkey gives refugee status only to those, oddly enough, fleeing Europe. Turks had in the past made exceptions for people they considered of Turkish descent and culture, but rarely non-Turks. The refugee policy fit the character of Turkey’s larger foreign policy for most of its 20th-century existence: defensive, removed from the Middle East and resistant to most immigration. Turkey worked hard to remain, always, a land of Turks.Erdogan changed all that. He brought with him a more critical view of old-style secular nationalism and a more positive one of Islamic identity, of Middle Eastern integration, of Turkey’s supremacy within the region. In many ways, Erdogan’s policies were overdue: nationalistic impulses prevented peace with the Kurds, who had demanded the freedom to be Kurdish, precluded discussions about the Armenian genocide and buttressed a kind of High Turkish snobbery when it came to its former Ottoman subjects, the Arabs. Turkey had never really been the “bridge” between West and East during the 20th century; it was the wall keeping them apart. But around 2009, friendly rhetoric and an easing of visa restrictions began drawing thousands of Arab businessmen and tourists to Turkey. In the 21st century, Turkey opened itself up to a region it had feared. In 2011, Erdogan declared that Turkey would open its borders to the Syrian refugees, “our brothers.”By the end of that year, 24,000 refugees lived in Turkey. Only five years later, there are three million, including non-Syrian refugees. (Lebanon and Jordan have absorbed more Syrians relative to their population than Turkey, whose population is 80 million.) The 2.7 million Syrians are everywhere. Only 300,000 are in refugee camps; the rest are looking for homes, jobs, husbands and wives throughout the country. Syrians outnumber the Turks in border cities like Kilis and equal their numbers in larger ones like Gaziantep and Urfa, where they are both visible and vulnerable: ISIS has killed Syrian journalists in their homes. Syrians even live in tiny Anatolian towns, on the coast and in the ethnically volatile East.Erdogan’s has been a laissez-faire humanitarianism. There is little support offered outside the refugee camps. Syrians register for “temporary protection.” Until recently they did not get work permits, which are still hard to obtain. Many Syrians, often children, ended up in one of Istanbul’s thousands of basement textile ateliers, sewing buttons and gluing shoes, working 12 hours a day, sometimes without being paid. Like Turks, they can go to hospitals and schools free, but enforcing this access is difficult; Syrians are at the mercy of the doctors and principals who don’t speak Arabic, who are already contending with crowded conditions and who often discriminate against the refugees. A great number of Syrians have fled to Europe. Turkey is a kind of frontier when it comes to capitalism: It can be hard for anyone to make it there. So two groups of Syrians will remain in Turkey, those too poor to leave and those rich enough to stay.In Istanbul, a makeshift society has taken hold. About 50 private Syrian schools have opened in the city alone, either in rented office buildings or in public-school buildings at night after the Turkish children are done for the day. Walking in the Fatih neighborhood, I once passed an empty storefront in which a Syrian woman was sitting with three students at a table. She had turned the vacant spot into a school, as if it were a pop-up art gallery. I have heard countless stories of tiny Turkish donations: bread, old clothes, money. These are the one-man nongovernmental organizations of daily life, the gifts that make life bearable.But there’s only so much that individuals can do. Every week there are lurid headlines in the newspapers: “Four-year-old Syrian Boy’s Body Found in the Bosporus.” “In Eskisehir 13 Syrians Poisoned by Carbon Monoxide.” “Syrian Shepherd Shot in the Leg.” “Syrian Woman Killed in Batman.” Stories are filled with prostitution, Turkish men taking Syrians as second wives, babies dying in the cold. This year, a cleaner in a refugee camp was convicted of raping 30 boys. In the summer of 2014, two incidents in particular shook the city of Gaziantep. In one instance, a Syrian driver — Syrians have license plates with “S” on them — struck a Turkish family on the street. In another, an angry Syrian tenant stabbed his landlord, who was evicting him, to death. Angry Turkish youth rioted, attacking “S” cars and throwing rocks through Syrian shop windows.El Nour, the Syrian sweets shop on Professor Naci Sensoy Street, is owned by a short man with red-rimmed blue eyes named Majed. In Damascus, he owned an ice-cream shop. He sent his oldest son to Turkey first, then came by plane himself with his two wives and five other children. He brought nothing with him but the money he made from selling his car. To make ends meet, one daughter worked in a dress shop, and his oldest son worked at a shoe store and helped out at El Nour. When Majed got to the point in his story of how he made it in Turkey, the details sounded less like the experience of a refugee than the long scrappy struggle of the immigrant.At first, when he opened the store, he had only one table sitting in the middle of the room and some lokma, or fried sweet dough, sitting on top of it. That and two other sweets were all he could afford to produce. And he sold nothing.“No one came and said hello, no one came and said welcome, nothing,” Majed said, still looking wounded. “No one bought any of my lokma. Some people would even say, ‘Within a year you will close this place.’ A neighbor said that! ‘You won’t do business here, because you don’t have customers.’ They were discouraging me.”Syrians went to Syrian shops, and Turks still went to the Turkish ones. They didn’t like each other’s food. The cuisines were similar enough that the minor differences struck people as if they were different cuisines entirely. “I used the best ingredients, the best oil, the best wheat!” he said. “I don’t know why they wouldn’t eat it! In Damascus they come and say congratulations and best of luck and buy stuff and encourage you. Here they did not.”And the Turks took advantage of him, putting him through what sounded like a kind of hazing. “In the beginning I wanted to buy flour from someone and make a small amount of prepayment,” he continued. “But I couldn’t pick up the flour the night I was supposed to, so I came the day after.” Not surprisingly, the Syrians have to endure an obstacle course to survive each day: how to get the bus, who will watch the kids, how to get to a specific address, is there enough money to get there? They missed appointments, couldn’t find offices. “The owner said, ‘I sold the flour to someone else,’ ” Majed told me. “It took two days to get my prepayment back.”Majed had not believed he would survive. But now, two years later, El Nour had a staff of eight. His two younger sons went to a Turkish religious school in the neighborhood and received high marks; the family found an apartment that was small, but spotless. Two of his daughters married in Turkey. Majed wanted to go home to Syria, but he imagined he might have to stay in Istanbul. His desserts are incredible.His friend, who had been sitting with us, joined the conversation. He planned to stay in Turkey as well. He was Turkish and Syrian but grew up in Syria and had the air of someone who liked to tell it like it is.“Turkey is good at welcoming us, but there are underage kids working in factories here,” he said. “Europe is better in that sense; they have more humanitarian values.” He paused before adding: “Though of course they are bombing us. My father was killed by one of these warplanes. The Europeans blame ISIS and they present themselves as humanitarian, but they have not a trace of humanitarianism when they bomb Syria.”From this perspective, who looked better than the Turks, who saved Syrian lives? I asked Syrians in Fatih if any of them blamed Erdogan for leaving the border open to jihadists who were passing through to join Al Qaeda or ISIS. They — these Syrian Arabs, anyway — did not. “We are happy,” the Turkish-Syrian from Syria said. “God bless the Turks. If Islam disappears on earth, then you should follow the Turks, because the Turks’ morality is the morality of god.”Every night at El Nour during Ramadan, a rush of customers came for the lokma. Majed worked 17 hours a day. He had become friends with his neighbor, a Turk originally from the Black Sea region who was an Erdogan evangelist. He told me how great Turkey was, how great Erdogan was, how great Karagumruk was. He said how much he was helping Majed, who knew just to listen and smile.One difference between Erdogan and just about any other leader dealing with the Syrian refugee crisis right now is that Erdogan has the power to make his people listen to him. That is why feminists fear his railing against abortion and also why some Turkish prosecutors take journalists and academics to court: If Erdogan gets on the radio or the television and rants about something four times, the prosecutor will open a case to please the system. It is why, on the night of Turkey’s fifth military coup in its century-long history, his people did something unprecedented: When Erdogan encouraged them to, they took to the streets and confronted tanks and soldiers. So when Erdogan is talking about the Syrians and asks, “Are we to abandon these people to bombs?” the answer among his constituents will be “No, of course not.”There is also a shared religious identity: the majority of Syrians are, like Erdogan’s people, Sunni. Syrians are foreign, but not the “other” in the way that, for many Europeans and Americans, all Muslims are the “other.” Unlike Western leaders, Erdogan could (and did) at first treat the Syrian refugee crisis as a humanitarian issue, rather than a security one.Perhaps more remarkable was Erdogan’s seeming disinclination, at least before last year, to regard anything as a security issue. Refugees came in from the south; jihadists hoping to fight against the Syrian government regularly flew into Istanbul’s main airport. The borders were open. During those years I routinely asked Erdogan supporters whether they feared the jihadists flooding into Syria through Turkey. Were they afraid of ISIS? They usually shrugged and said Erdogan could handle them. No one in the world was stronger than Erdogan, they said, and he seemed to believe this, too.Little of this mattered in last November’s election, won by Erdogan’s party for the fourth time; at the time of the attempted coup, some suggested his support was decreasing, but the fury in the streets that night indicated otherwise. His effect on the populace is sometimes called a cult of personality, but his popularity was originally built on competence. I recently met a man in his 40s, no fan of Erdogan, who recalled that in Istanbul in the 1980s they had water only a few times a week. “And you know what changed that?” he said with a sigh. It was when Erdogan became mayor of the city in 1994.For Erdogan’s supporters, a force field surrounds him, powered by megaprojects, Islamic identity, prosperity and honor. The logical progression for the man who brought water to the largest city in the country would be more and better services, bridges and airports. Erdogan himself is an expansionist power, of sorts, and his actions have been reminiscent of what any aspiring imperial power often does when it requires more land, more resources and more proof of its own achievements: It goes to war.“We are a Muslim country,” a Karagumruk butcher told me. “Spiritually we are progressing, morally. The government stands with the Muslims who are being attacked unjustly. They defend our religious values. They stand with Muslims and Turks.”By this summer, the country had experienced almost 20 bombings, some by ISIS, some by Kurdish groups. Erdogan’s brutal war with one Kurdish militant group, the P.K.K., had intensified, and 7,500 people were killed. At least 100,000 Kurds fled their destroyed cities. Erdogan’s rhetoric was merciless (“surrender to justice or be neutralized, one by one”), and so Turks again were angry at the P.K.K., in their mind their historic, existential threat. ISIS was not that. What was ISIS, anyway? Was it Iran, Israel, Syria’s embattled leader, the United States? In any case, when ISIS set off bombs in Turkey, they usually targeted secular Kurds, leftists or tourist attractions and so, as far as some Turks were concerned, ISIS wasn’t attacking Turkey at all.Still, Erdogan consolidated his power, and to an alarming degree. Even before the attempted coup, he made a worrisome habit of jailing his enemies: journalists who claimed he supported Islamist rebels, academics for criticizing his Kurdish policy. Turkey’s European neighbors and American allies didn’t seem to care. Erdogan had a powerful bargaining chip with which to scare the West: millions of Arab refugees. The West promised Erdogan three billion euros to keep them there. Over time, though, it became much harder to go to Turkey if you were Syrian. At the border, some were even shot by Turkish soldiers. In arguing that Europe should not be closing its doors, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International and Doctors Without Borders have declared Turkey an unsafe country for refugees, which means, as a legal definition, that they require protection.Inside the Golden Scissors barbershop, though, they were still extolling another kind of protection, that of the Ottomans. “We Turks, the children of the Ottomans, we welcome the world,” Murat said in late June. “We protect foreigners. It’s not just Muslims, foreigners included. And we listen to Tayyip Erdogan. We obey Tayyip Erdogan. He said everyone must look after at least one Syrian. According to the votes he received, 52 percent obey him like that,” he said, referring to the results of Erdogan’s last election.The man getting his haircut turned around, excitedly, trying to get my attention. His name was Sahin. “I am 30 years old,” he said. “I have three daughters. The reason I have three daughters? Re-cep. Tay-yip. Er-do-gan.” For years Erdogan had been advising Turks to have three, or maybe five, children.“I’m 40!” Murat said. “And I’m about to have my fourth child. Four.” I asked if Erdogan was the reason. “Of course,” he said.“The president said we have to increase the Muslim population,” Sahin said.“We believe one Turk is worth the world,” Murat said, quoting a well-known slogan. “Turkish Muslims think this way. We don’t abandon our homeland. This is the love for our country. ... This came upon the Syrians because they abandoned Islam. Because they became European.” (He added that foreign powers were also to blame for Syria’s plight.)I asked, “Do you mean you would fight for your homeland or you would fight for Erdogan?”“Great question! Amazing question!” Sahin said. “Look, I grew up in Tayyip’s generation. I would fight for Tayyip.”Murat said: “Muslims are Turks. It doesn’t matter. We are of the Ummah. Kurds too. We’re talking about the Ottoman state here. We fight for Islam.” I could see why the Syrians might fit more easily into this worldview than that of others.Everyone in Karagumruk was nostalgic. Ismail Altintoprak, the muhtar, and many men like him longed for the European cosmopolitanism of an earlier Istanbul. Those in the barbershop saw the Ottoman Empire as the true manifestation of Muslim brotherhood. The one group held onto Ataturk’s secular vision; the other celebrated Erdogan’s Islamic one. But the two did seem to agree on what they rejected: this roiling, bizarre, terrifying modern mess of the present day.That same week in June, the muhtar’s chickens and rooster strutted and squawked in and out of his office during the day, in part so the chickens could discreetly lay eggs under his desk. When Altintoprak was young, his father wrote Islamic prayers in the old Ottoman Turkish-Arabic script on eggshells so that his son might get the kind of chick he wanted: one with a tuft of hair on top of its head. I had thought the muhtar’s last name, Altintoprak, meant something like “golden soil,” but Turks didn’t have last names before the modern republic, and so when Turkey became Turkey, Altintoprak’s twice-married father took one in memory of the deaths of his first 12 children. Altintoprak, the muhtar says, means “under ground.”During one visit, he was upset about how on the state-sponsored channel, TRT, a professor of religion had said that those who didn’t pray during Ramadan were animals, which created a stir.“The people these days have spider brains!” Altintoprak said. On the wall, above his head, hung a plastic mold of the face of Ataturk. “People who don’t pray are animals? Yeah, your heart is rotten. Real Muslims don’t speak this way.”Two young Arab men in pink shirts, hightops and trendy flat-visor baseball hats walked in together, asking for directions. The muhtar looked at the paper. “From here, turn right, then left, then right again on the second street.”I asked them where they were from. In Turkish, they said Syria and Morocco and winked at me. “Were they refugees?” I asked Altintoprak when they left. “Yes, refugees,” he said smiling. It was very likely that everywhere in Turkey, the administrative tasks of a refugee crisis of several million people were falling to people like him.Another man wearing a skullcap, who was Altintoprak’s friend, sat down heavily, saying with a sigh, “Allahu akbar.” The men began to talk about a devastating drug in the neighborhood called bonzai, which led them to talk about how people used to make fake raki, which led them to talk about a furniture seller nearby who made fake wine. As always, the theme of the day was the melancholy of change.The rooster walked into the office and crowed. The muhtar brought up again how much he missed the time of the Greeks. “Look at this bazaar we have,” he said. “In the past there were Arabs from Siirt,” a city in Turkey, “they sold watermelon and fruit. There were Albanians, they sold grapes and curly lettuce and onions.”“They sold fish too,” his friend said.“They weren’t fish sellers, they were vegetable sellers,” Altintoprak said. “The Tatar sold rice. Then the Kurds came. Now you can’t find an Albanian selling cucumbers or onions anywhere. The people from Nevsehir were here, they sold potatoes. They also left. The Kurds came. They sell shoes, they sell pickles, they sell peppers. Look, over there is a lemon seller, he sells lemons. A Syrian helps him. If the lemon seller, a Kurd, goes to the mosque, the Syrian watches his stand. Pretty soon the whole bazaar, you know what will happen. It will be Syrian.”The last time I saw the muhtar, he spent 15 minutes helping someone find the office of social services. He was Syrian, too.A few days after the airport bombing, it was announced that the attackers were from Russia, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. They had, like many migrants, been living in Fatih, 10 minutes from Karagumruk. Erdogan announced that he was considering a plan whereby some Syrians would get citizenship. Soon after, a hashtag appeared on Twitter: #IDontWantSyriansInMyCountry. In Konya province, in the south, a Turkish man and a Syrian man knifed each other to death because a group of Syrians had kicked a dog. People began to accuse Erdogan of admitting Syrians for votes. Some Syrians in Karagumruk told me they thought the Turks hated them; all Syrians I spoke to said they wanted to go home.For a full century, the Turks had been arguing over what it meant to be a Turk. The intensity of this debate divided the secular from the religious, led to war between the Turks and the Kurds. Would the new Arab Turkish citizens be Arabs or would they be Turks? Would the Arabs fit into Erdogan’s version of the imagined community? Would the Kurds? Would the West continue to watch as Erdogan used three million vulnerable people as moral credit to do what he wanted — subdue the Kurds, jail the dissenters, replace a parliamentary system with a presidential one? In one sense, little has changed since World War I. Peace doesn’t come without violence, one population is not saved without sacrificing another and the peoples of the Middle East remain something with which the West can barter, in pursuit of the grand old imperial illusion of prosperity and order, however impossible that seems right now to attain.The illusion, however, is a beautiful one. In Karagumruk, on bazaar day, one day a week, the hawkers set up wooden tables and stack pyramids of unmarred oranges, sea bass flayed red at the gills, olives from five cities glistening in bins. The Syrian girls shopping with their mothers wear head scarves in white. The strawberry guys are Kurdish, the pepper guys are Turkish, the white-cheese guys are from Turkey’s far east. As they work, Istanbul’s light glows around their faces like a spectral caress. Nearby, inside the little white playhouse, the muhtar is dreaming of Constantinople, still giving directions to anyone who asks.Suzy Hansen is a contributing writer for the magazine. She last wrote about Yanis Varoufakis, the former finance minister of Greece.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement