https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/01/reader-center/motoko-rich-behind-the-byline.html
Our Tokyo Bureau Chief on Where She Finds ‘Bolts of Insight’ (Hint: It’s Outside the Office) - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
316
AdvertisementSupported byBEHIND THE BYLINE • MOTOKO RICHInterview by Lara TakenagaThe Reader Center has started a new series of short interviews, Behind the Byline, to introduce you to Times journalists. Is there a reporter, photographer or editor whom you would like to get to know? Tell us in the comments section.Motoko Rich straddles two cultures as our Japanese-American Tokyo bureau chief. Landing the job almost three years ago meant returning to the country where her mother was born and where she had spent part of her childhood. A reporter for The Times since 2003, Motoko draws on her dual identity to bring nuance, empathy and “fresh eyes” to our coverage of Japan and the Koreas. Here, she discusses the challenges of interviewing Japanese people, her alternate dream job and how her two children help her see the world.What do you enjoy most about working in Japan? What is most challenging about it?Japan is a country where people keep their public and private selves completely distinct. They have words for both: “Tatemae” refers to behavior or words used in public; “hon’ne” is the word for your true feelings. I think what I enjoy most — and what is most challenging — about working in Japan can be expressed by those two words. I really do relish that feeling of getting to know a source well enough that I feel like they are letting me in on “hon’ne,” but there are many times when I wonder if all I am getting is “tatemae.”How has your background, as a half-Japanese woman who grew up in the United States and Japan, informed your work?I have written a little about this before. Because of my background, there is no question that my curiosity about Japanese society is personal as well as professional. I am driven to understand this place, and to help our readers understand it, in a nuanced, nonstereotyped way (no stories about anime-obsessed men marrying robots!).One of the advantages of my background as a journalist is that I have always been an outsider wherever I am. That tends to put me in the observer’s seat. Here in Japan, because of my American side, people don’t assume that I know much about Japan and are willing to explain things to me (sometimes to an excessive degree). It also gives me the privilege of being able to question basic assumptions about Japanese society, while the Japanese side of my identity helps me understand why people here react in a way that might seem strange to someone who has no familiarity with Japanese culture.If you had to choose another job, in journalism or not, what would it be?I definitely have a dream job now, but when I imagine another path it’s writing novels for children. I would love to make kids feel the way that Katherine Paterson, Ellen Raskin, Judy Blume, Madeleine L’Engle and Robert Newton Peck made me feel as an only child, when I found my best friends in their books. I read them obsessively and repeatedly.How do you spend your time when you’re off duty?When you’re a foreign correspondent, you’re technically never off duty! As often as possible, I try to make it home to family dinner (which my husband cooks, bless him), because I really want to hear what my kids have to say. Adolescents have a way of, shall we say, putting you in your place, but they can also deliver bolts of insight, and I want to be around as often as possible when those drop. Both of my kids play sports, so on weekends my husband and I can be found on the soccer sidelines or cheering someone on to a finish line. I love to bake (chocolate treats are a great antidote to stress), and in good weather we ride our bikes around Tokyo. If it were up to me, we would visit a lot more museums (and my husband and I occasionally do, if the kids are otherwise occupied — although the whole family enjoyed TeamLab Borderless). On the rare weekend when the kids aren’t playing a game or running in a meet, we try to explore new hiking trails. We probably watch a little too much streaming television: The family likes episodes of the Japanese reality show “Terrace House,” “The Good Place” and “Atlanta,” while my daughter and I are currently working our way through “The Handmaid’s Tale” and “This Is Us.” My son and I like to watch Trevor Noah on “The Daily Show.” And if I don’t have a novel going at all times, I fall into a nagging funk (suggestions welcome). I intersperse the fiction with books of history, as I still have so much to learn about Japan and the Koreas. I am ever in search of a volume about Japan as good as “Embracing Defeat” by John Dower.What’s your favorite Japanese expression?I like “yabai!” right now. You have to be aware of the context: It means “dangerous!” in some contexts and “awesome!” in others.Illustration by Rebecca ClarkeA note to readers who are not subscribers: This article from the Reader Center does not count toward your monthly free article limit.Follow the @ReaderCenter on Twitter for more coverage highlighting your perspectives and experiences and for insight into how we work.Lara Takenaga is a staff editor for the Reader Center.  @LaraTakenaga Advertisement