https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/30/dining/new-champagne-brands.html
The Year of Champagnes You’ve Never Heard Of - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1966
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovShopping for wine often requires plunging into the unknown. That is especially true this year for Champagne, because a new wave of small grower-producers on the shelves can mystify even the seasoned wine lover: Éric Rodez, Guillaume Sergent, Suenen, Bourgeois-Diaz, for a start. Who are these guys?If you love Champagne, you will want to get to know these small producers, some of whom I’ve encountered for the first time.Once, in another universe maybe 25 years ago, shopping for Champagne was not complicated. You simply had to familiarize yourself with a few of a couple of dozen big houses.These grandes marques, or great brands, all professed to have a house style, which they adhered to year after year by blending wines from different terroirs within the Champagne region and from different vintages. Whereas fine wine from almost every other region in the world sought to express the particularities of place and vintage, Champagne prided itself on a mingled consistency year after year.But that easy world began to change in the 1990s with a trickle of grower-producers, small farmers who grew their own grapes and made their own wines, into the international market.Without the vast blending capacity of the big houses, these grower-produced Champagnes, like other wines, displayed the singular qualities of terroir and often differed from vintage to vintage. They offered a stark contrast to the too-often-bland consistency of the big houses.With time, as they became more familiar, they began to challenge the notion of what Champagne was. No longer could the big houses coast on their well-marketed definition of Champagne as a celebratory beverage of the cellar. No, the success of the grower-producers redefined Champagne as a wine and forced the entire region to raise its game.It also greatly increased demand for these smaller producers, even if they still account for only a small percentage of sales. In 2014, almost a million bottles of grower Champagne were shipped to the United States, up from about 273,000 in 2000, according to the Comité Champagne, a trade association. While this accounted for only 5 percent of the Champagne shipped in 2014, that percentage had more than tripled from the 1.4 percent shipped in 2000.Some in the initial wave of grower-producers have become almost ubiquitous in New York. This is especially so in the domains of inexperienced sommeliers who, in the same manner as those who turned their backs on Bordeaux a few years ago, insist on stocking only grower-producers, out of a misplaced conviction that the big houses are unfashionable.Excellent grower-producers like Pierre Peters, Pierre Gimonnet, Larmandier-Bernier and Egly-Ouriet are no longer rarities. A second wave of producers like Raphaël Bérêche, Cédric Bouchard and Ulysse Collin are now highly sought, and some, like Jacques Selosse and Jérôme Prévost, have become cult figures.All of which leaves American importers thirsting for new grower-producers, and accounts for the flood of unfamiliar Champagnes I’m seeing on the shelves this season. Some of these names are definitely worth getting to know, like Éric Rodez, whose wines I’ve come to love.Rodez is not a new producer. The family has been making Champagne for generations, but I’ve only just begun to see the wines in the New York market.Rodez is centered in Ambonnay, which is known as pinot noir country, but the producer makes an unusual, superb blanc de blancs ($65) from Ambonnay chardonnay. It is richer and fuller than the blanc de blancs you might find from, say, Vertus, but pure and beautifully balanced with great finesse and minerality. Rodez also makes a more conventional blend of chardonnay and pinot noir, Cuvée des Crayères ($58), that is voluminous yet graceful, lively and absolutely delicious.Unlike Rodez, Guillaume Sergent is new, not having created his own brand until 2011. But Les Prés Dieu ($48), Sergent’s extra brut blanc de blancs, will get your attention. Though it was bottled very young (Sergent doesn’t have the resources to age the wines properly) it’s unusually graceful and elegant, with creamy mineral flavors.I also loved an extra brut blanc de blancs ($60) from another young producer, Suenen, which showed finesse and precision along with savory, chalky flavors. Yet another delightful blanc de blancs, Conversation ($46), from J. L. Vergnon, a producer who has been available off and on in the United States, was rich, creamy and mineral-laden.I had heard of Veuve Fourny & Fils before, but somehow had never encountered the Champagne in New York. My loss. This small producer makes wonderfully interesting wines, like its entry-level Grande Réserve ($44), a beautifully detailed blend of 80 percent chardonnay and 20 percent pinot noir with great balance, finesse and tension.By contrast, the Champagnes of Bourgeois-Diaz are entirely different. A Bourgeois-Diaz brut ($46), a blend of pinot meunier, pinot noir and chardonnay, was rustic and loosely knit rather than elegant, but fresh, balanced and full of vibrant life.Not surprisingly, these Champagnes will be available in only a few markets around the United States. For one thing, most grower-producers don’t make enough wine to be distributed nationally. It’s entirely possible that consumers in, say, Chicago, San Francisco, Atlanta and Portland, Ore., will find different sets of grower-producers.For another, dealing with the complicated three-tier system for distributing wine in the United States — in which producers must often deal with different distributors (and laws) in each state to reach retailers — can be far more confusing and time-consuming for small producers than following the simpler rules of the European Union.“The U.S. is getting more attention because the economy is good, but the three-tier system is discouraging,” said Sam Heitner, director of the U.S. Champagne Bureau, a marketing arm of the Champagne trade. “But if the E.U. picks up, they may go elsewhere, where they don’t have to deal with multiple distributors.”By the way, Champagne lovers have long been taught that the easy way to tell the grower-producers from the bigger houses is to read the fine print on the label, where a tiny code distinguishes among NM for négociant-manipulants, or merchant-producers (including grandes marques); RM for récoltant-manipulants, or grower-producers; and CM for coopérative-manipulants, or co-ops; along with a few less important categories.But the strict definition for each category can complicate matters. Say, for example, that a family grower-producer is passed from the parents to their three children. Under French law, the estate will have to be equally divided among the siblings. Perhaps one will own the production facilities and the others the vineyards. The producer will then have to buy the grapes from the two vineyard owners, transforming what had been an RM into an NM. Same estate, just organized differently.Or a small family estate may buy a few well-chosen lots of grapes to supplement its own vineyard. This, too, renders it an NM, even though it possesses an RM point of view.As always in wine, know the producer above all else.Here are a few small Champagne producers well worth seeking out.Éric Rodez Exceptional Champagnes from the Ambonnay area. (AP Wine Imports, New York)Guillaume Sergent A new producer with lovely, elegant Champagnes. (A Daniel Johnnes Selection/Skurnik Wines, New York)Suenen Another new producer making savory, sleek Champagnes. (A Transatlantic Bubbles Selection/Classic Wines, Stamford, Conn.)J. L. Vergnon Creamy, rich Champagnes that are balanced and elegant. (Weygandt-Metzler, Unionville, Pa.)Veuve Fourny & Fils Beautifully detailed Champagnes of great finesse. (Kermit Lynch Wine Merchant, Berkeley, Calif.)Bourgeois-Diaz Rustic Champagnes, yet alive and full of energy. (A Vinotas Selection/Fruit of the Vines, Long Island City, N.Y.)email: asimov@nytimes.com. And followEric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.Advertisement