https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/08/nyregion/in-harvest-season-endless-hours-with-no-overtime-for-new-york-farmworkers.html
Long Days in the Fields, Without Earning Overtime  - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1796
AdvertisementSupported byBy Joseph BergerRED HOOK, N.Y. — In the early stage of the harvest season, Antonio, a farmworker in his 50s, picked peas from daybreak until sundown, 14 hours a day, six days a week, with an hour off each day for lunch.“I’m tired,” he said, speaking through an interpreter. “Right now my knees hurt a lot because all day I work bending over or down on my knees.”His workweek at a fruit and vegetable farm in Dutchess County will be even tougher in October when the apples are ready for harvest — many of which will be sold in New York City’s popular greenmarkets: He will no longer have Sundays off. For all that toil, he is paid $8 an hour, the minimum wage. The long hours are expected; there is no overtime pay.While most American wage earners accustomed to a 40-hour week would be surprised at those conditions, for farmworkers in New York it is within the law.The lack of overtime pay, as well as the absence of rights to disability insurance and collective bargaining, are artifacts of the exclusions of agricultural work from the federal wage, hour and labor relations acts of the 1930s that were adopted by most states and have seldom been changed. Only California, Colorado, Hawaii, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota and Oregon require time-and-a-half pay for overtime — though in some cases after 60 hours of work a week — and only a dozen states explicitly give farmworkers the right to unionize.One advocate for expanding protections, Kerry Kennedy, president of the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights, points out that the exclusions are a legacy of the Jim Crow era. Southern legislators, in exchange for their votes to support changed wage laws, demanded that agricultural workers — in their states the workers were largely black — must be exempted from many labor safeguards.Legislators in Albany have tried for years to change the law to protect the wages of the state’s estimated 60,000 to 100,000 farmworkers, most of them Latino migrants, many undocumented. But the New York Farm Bureau, which represents 15,000 farmers and 10,000 additional members, has lobbied against the effort.While the State Assembly, with a Democratic majority, has supported such legislation, upstate Republicans and some upstate Democrats in the Senate have blocked it. Still, advocates feel they are close to securing passage and are looking hopefully toward the possibility of Democratic control of the Senate after the November election.State Senator Diane J. Savino, a Staten Island Democrat, sponsored a narrow farmworkers rights bill that would have required overtime after 60 hours and a day off each week. She said the Farm Bureau successfully argued that such bills would be the “death knell of family farms,” even though “most family farms would not be affected because they don’t actually employ farmworkers.”The fact that many farmworkers are here illegally was not an issue, Ms. Savino said, since there is a farm labor shortage and the Farm Bureau itself seeks to expand the numbers of immigrant laborers.The Farm Bureau contends agriculture is a unique kind of labor, different from manufacturing or service industries because it is heavily dependent on the seasons and the weather. Fruit has to be picked when it is ripe; cows require regular milking. Paying workers extra for overtime would increase the price to consumers and make New York products less competitive with those of farmers in other states, the bureau says.Dean Norton, its president, said most workers did not have duties in winter, so during the five-month growing season they choose to work as many hours as they can to earn money to send home to Mexico or the other countries they come from. If the long hours during those five months are spread over 52 weeks, he said, farmworkers end up working about the same number of hours per year as factory workers. The bureau opposes collective bargaining because strikes would cripple the ability of farmers to get fresh produce to consumers.Ms. Kennedy, whose father, Robert F. Kennedy, was close to Cesar Chavez, the champion of farmworkers’ right to unionize, said the fiercest opposition to paying overtime was from large farms with scores of workers who would qualify for overtime while small farms, which were either family-operated or used only a few hired workers, had not been vocal in objecting.Leanne Tory-Murphy, an outreach worker at Worker Justice Center of New York in Kingston, which arranged the interview with Antonio, said, “Overtime protections are put in place for a reason, so workers are not working themselves to the bone.” She takes issue with farms that sell at greenmarkets in the city and flaunt their healthful credentials but do not pay workers overtime.“A code of conduct is not included under the umbrella of ethical eating,” she said.Antonio resists the Farm Bureau’s logic.“Why are we as workers not deserving of overtime?” he asked. “If it is raining and farmer wants production, he makes us work in the rain. If the temperature surpasses 90 degrees, we’re there working. I see in other industries there are workers in lighter jobs that are not exposed to the conditions we are exposed to and yet they’re entitled to overtime and we are not.”Like many farmworkers in New York, Antonio was smuggled into the country, though even farmworkers who are legal residents or citizens are seldom paid overtime. Because of his undocumented status, he, like other farmworkers interviewed, did not want his last name published.“We have conversations among ourselves, and we are of the same mind,” he said of the 30 workers on his farm, most of whom are from Guatemala. “But we are afraid to speak out.”He concedes that even without overtime, he earns much more than he could at home in Mexico. He also volunteers that he prefers farm work to, say, landscaping, because he can commute from worker housing to the fields using the farmers’ vehicles. His 20-year-old son works alongside him, saving money for college. His other son, 21, attends the University of Pachuca in Hidalgo.Lazaro, 39, came to the United States from Mexico City last year and since November has worked on a dairy farm in Johnstown, between Albany and the Finger Lakes. He rises at 4 a.m. to milk cows, muck out barns and clean milking equipment for 15 hours a day at $8 an hour.“It is quite exhausting,” he said. “Sometimes we don’t get a day of rest. Two weeks ago we had off on a Wednesday, last week off on a Thursday. This week my boss told me I don’t have a day off.”He said his boss had held back the equivalent of 14 days’ pay as “a deposit,” though he is not certain what the deposit is for. On a small farm like the one where he works, he said, “there is abuse of us because we are immigrants.”He sends almost all the money he earns to Mexico to help send his son and daughter to college, keeping only enough for his food.One category of worker does earn more than the state’s minimum wage. More than 2,000 guest workers like Donald, a 50-year-old Jamaican who picks fruit at a large orchard near here, are working in New York under the federal H-2A visa program and are guaranteed $11.22 an hour — but without overtime.“You have to sacrifice in life,” Donald said, standing in front of four refrigerators he and seven other Jamaicans share in their spartan trailer-like barracks. “I need money for my family, so you have to sacrifice something.”Advertisement