https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/03/dining/vinho-verde-portuguese-for-cheap-and-cheerful.html
Vinho Verde: Portuguese for ‘Cheap and Cheerful’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1970
AdvertisementSupported byWines of The TimesBy Eric AsimovLet me get this straight: a bottle of wine, an enjoyable bottle of wine, for just $4? A mistake? Nope. An anomaly, perhaps, as this bottle is apparently available in the United States only at Astor Wines and Spirits in Greenwich Village. But the $4 bottle, a 2011 Este from the Adega Cooperativa de Ponte da Barca, is a typical, if exaggerated, example of the inexpensive pleasures of Vinho Verde, the easy-drinking wine of northwestern Portugal that has become a welcome symbol of summer for many Americans.In the last few years, Vinho Verde has soared in popularity here. If the thirst for Vinho Verde hasn’t yet reached the all-out craziness of the rosé embrace, it has at least risen well beyond a mini-fad like txakolina, the wine of Spanish Basque country that has become popular here. Look at the numbers. In 2012, Portugal shipped almost 5.5 million bottles of Vinho Verde to the United States, according to the Portugal Global Trade and Investment Agency. On its own, that’s not a huge amount. But it’s well more than triple the approximately 1.65 million bottles shipped 10 years ago, an enormous leap for a wine that many people know very little about. We now see the wines frequently enough to warrant further investigation. So, at the end of May, the wine panel tasted 20 bottles of Vinho Verde bought at shops in the New York area and online. For the tasting, Florence Fabricant and I were joined by the husband-and-wife tasting team of Beth von Benz, a wine consultant and a sommelier, and Scott Mayger, the general manager of the restaurant Telepan on the Upper West Side. What did we find? At their best, these wines are fresh and lively, zingy, zesty, sometimes fizzy and above all, untaxing. They are low in alcohol, generally 9 to 12.5 percent, and very low in price. The $4 bottle was by far the cheapest, but 8 of our top 10 were $10 and under. “These wines fit the $8.99 cheap-and-cheerful slot in the retail shop,” Beth said. “They have a purpose.”I mention the approximate date of the tasting because 16 of the 20 bottles we accumulated in May came from the 2011 vintage. Those bottles are old by what was once the conventional standard, which holds that you would try to drink Vinho Verdes within a year of harvest, as if they were Beaujolais nouveau. Indeed, the name Vinho Verde means green wine, suggesting not the color but that they are intended to be enjoyed in their energetic youth. The category in fact does not discriminate by color. It comprises red and rosé wines, too, though the whites have come to dominate production and consumption in the last 30 years.My point, though, is not to get too hung up on vintages. The 2011s we tasted were lively enough, and seemed not to have suffered much from fatigue. While two of the three 2012s in our tasting were among our top three wines, I would not hesitate to drink a 2011. Nonetheless, if you have the option, look for the freshest bottles. It may well be that if you search the shops in mid-July or August the 2011 vintage will have given way to the 2012. Don’t hesitate to move on to the next vintage. The Vinho Verde region in northwestern Portugal lies flush on the Atlantic Coast, jutting inland like a left-hand mitten. Porto, the center of port commerce, sits on its southwestern coastal edge, while the spectacular terraced vineyards of the Douro lie to the east of the region. While the Douro is protected from the Atlantic by hills and stays hot and dry, the Vinho Verde region receives the full brunt of the maritime influence. The countryside shimmers a distinct green, and some will tell you that Vinho Verde refers to the lush terrain rather than the age at which the wine is meant to be consumed. Vinho Verdes are traditionally made from a blend of unfamiliar grapes like arinto, azal, loureiro and trajadura, also known as treixadura in Spain. In recent years, more producers have been using the alvarinho grape, better known to Americans by its Spanish name albariño. But very few wines in our tasting incorporated alvarinho, which may have been one reason they were so inexpensive. Vinho Verdes are often thought to be mildly fizzy, and occasionally they are. But the spritziness, historically a natural byproduct of fermentation but nowadays generally induced by injecting carbon dioxide, seemed to be random among the bottles we tasted, with no real way to discern its presence in advance. It’s a pleasant characteristic but not so crucial that you’ll miss it if it’s absent. The individual wines themselves leave not much to dwell on. Tangy, lively and fresh are the salient characteristics, and the wines are better or worse to the degree that these features express themselves. Yet some differences are worth noting. Our No. 1 wine, the 2011 Vidigal Shocking Green, had a particularly inviting texture, while our No. 2, the 2012 Vera, had mineral and citrus flavors that lingered. The 2012 Niepoort Dócil, made entirely of loureiro, seemed to have more depth than many of the others. It was the most expensive bottle in the tasting at $14.You may be wondering about the name Shocking Green. Not so shocking, actually. While Vinho Verde is one of Portugal’s more popular wines at home, exports have been rising. In 2012, 37 percent of the Vinho Verde production was exported, and the single largest recipient by far was the United States. So proprietary names like Shocking Green and J. M. Fonseca’s Twin Vines can be expected. Perhaps you’re also wondering about that $4 bottle? It was tart, fresh and very pleasing, not that far removed from the $14 bottle, in fact. I would say that’s pretty good for a $4 bottle. At that price, you can have a case of Vinho Verde for the cost of one mediocre bottle of chardonnay. Perfect time for a pool party. What the stars mean: Ratings, up to four stars, reflect the panel’s reaction to the wines, which were tasted with names and vintages concealed. The wines represent a selection generally available in good retail shops and restaurants and on the Internet. Prices are those paid in shops in the New York region.; Tasting coordinator: Bernard Kirsch 	Vidigal, $10, ** ½ 	Vinho Verde Shocking Green 2011 	Tangy and refreshing with an inviting texture and crisp flavors of apple, citrus and nuts. (Frederick Wildman & Sons, New York)  	Vera, $10, ** ½ 	Vinho Verde 2012 	Fresh and lively, with clean, lingering mineral and citrus flavors. (Obrigado-Vinhos Portugal, Sausalito, Calif.)  	Niepoort, $14, ** ½ 	Vinho Verde Dócil Loureiro 2012 	Aromas and flavors of citrus, apples and flowers, with more depth than many others. (Polaner Selections, New York)  	BEST VALUE 	Adega Cooperativa de Ponte da Barca, $4, ** ½ 	Vinho Verde Este 2011 	Tart and fresh with pleasing, long-lasting flavors of lemon and apples. (H-Squared Wines, New York)  	Casa do Valle, $10, ** ½ 	Vinho Verde 2011 	Pleasant texture with flavors of tart citrus and pear. (Massanois, Washington, D.C.)  	J.M. Fonseca, $8, ** 	Vinho Verde Twin Vines 2011 	Dry and inviting with aromas and flavors of citrus and flowers. (Palm Bay International, Boca Raton, Fla.)  	Gazela, $5, ** 	Vinho Verde 2011 	Light, fresh and straightforward with floral and lemon aromas and flavors. (Evaton, Stamford, Conn.)  	Adega de Moncao, $13, ** 	Vinho Verde Muralhas de Moncao 2011 	Lively and clean with zingy, tart citrus flavors. (Aidil Vines and Liquors, Newark)  	Broadbent, $9, ** 	Vinho Verde 2011 	Clean and balanced with pleasant texture and lively citrus flavors. (Broadbent Selections, San Francisco)  	João Portugal Ramos, $10, ** 	Vinho Verde Lima Loureiro 2011 	Tart, lively and straightforward with pleasing citrus flavors. (Winebow, New York) Advertisement