https://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/11/dining/diy-cocktail-party-theyll-drink-to-that.html
D.I.Y. Cocktail Party? They’ll Drink to That - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2255
AdvertisementSupported by7 PhotosView Slide Show ›By Jennifer Steinhauer and Helene CooperTO: HELENEFROM: JENNIFER  My dearest Helene,Over the decade that we have been work colleagues, our greatest collaborations have not, admittedly, been journalistic. Sure, we’ve always had some fiscal-crisis story to attend to — me reporting from Capitol Hill, and you ensconced over at the White House. But let’s face it, our interests are often more Drambuie than debt ceiling.So as the holidays are upon us again, I feel the need to reach out. I can’t quite decide what I dread more: the canned holiday music at the grocery store, the abundance of red or all those cloying glasses of eggnog handed to us at office parties.One of the most puzzling things about our drinking culture is that while we have restored, revived and invented wonderful cocktails over the last decade, our holiday drinks often remain woefully antiquated and disappointing. I don’t want eggnog unless it is exceptional. Phooey on the sauvignon blanc, which we all should have retired at the beach last August, and peace out, please, to the sherbet punch.I don’t think it has to be this way. We can do better as a people for our holiday parties by embracing classic ingredients, seasonal citrus fruits and holiday colors — but ditching the clichés. We may be amateurs, but it doesn’t take much to throw together some great cocktails, and even a great cocktail party.Discuss.TO: JENNIFERFROM: HELENEHi, Steinhauer,Yes, for the holidays, you really have to crank up the cocktails a notch. Nobody looks good in red, but how about a red frozen vodka slushy? Red Roosters have become one of my specialty holiday drinks, and people love them. First, no one expects that you’re going to give them a frozen drink at Christmas; it’s usually all mulled wine and hot spiked cider. But the Red Rooster is so deliciously icy that it perks you right out of any holiday blues.And you can make them days ahead. You mix vodka, orange juice concentrate and cranberry-tangerine juice cocktail in a pitcher and freeze overnight (or whenever — I have left this stuff in my freezer for weeks; I usually freeze them in those tall water carafes you can buy at Target). When it’s time to serve, just take the pitcher out and have a spoon ready to scrape the Red Roosters into martini glasses; they will never freeze solid, thanks to the vodka.(I’ve also made them with white cranberry juice, during a blizzard, when everyone on my snowed-in street was climbing the walls and in dire need of cocktails. While it didn’t look like snow in a glass, it looked a bit like freezing rain.)TO: HELENEFROM: JENNIFEREasy prep: a good point. Holiday cocktails should be special, but not too complicated. A bartender gets sad and cranky with too many ingredients to work with, and no one wants to wait in line for complex fare.One of my best memories of an office party is of you, standing in as the makeshift bartender, whipping up Campari-and-orange-juice cocktails, which slowly but surely had the collective effect of making all of us like our colleagues quite a bit more than we actually do. How did you come up with that drink? And how easy is it to replicate on the fly?When it comes to cocktails and work, I generally invent them in response to a bad day. My personal favorite involves clementine oranges, one of the most delightful contributions of the winter trees, and gin, snazzed up with some soda water. And when things get dark and cold, I sometimes repair to the Tabard Inn here in Washington for its decent selections of Italian reds, but I can be lured by its signature cocktail, a blend of tequila, sherry and Drambuie, infused with the December aromas of thyme and citrus.TO: JENNIFERFROM: HELENEYou asked about the Campari orange cocktails that I served a couple of years ago, right at deadline, as I recall. Campari is so deeply underrated: I discovered it more than a decade ago. The woman sitting next to me on a plane ordered “Campari on ice,” so, trying to seem sophisticated, I did, too. It was so bitter; I hated it. But a few months later, I was in Florence with some friends in the Piazza della Signoria, and they ordered “Campari orange.”The orange juice was the key; the bitter Campari loves the sweet tartness of orange juice. Now that I think of it, a proper Campari orange looks pretty and holiday-festive, too. It’s ridiculously easy to make. Just put ice cubes in a glass, add orange juice and top with Campari. Adjust the liquor-to-O.J. ratio, according to how new a person is to drinking Campari. The color can go from a luscious pink, for the novice, to full-on red, for me.But stop fooling around and move on to your gin-and-ginger cocktails. You know what I’m talking about.TO: HELENEFROM: JENNIFERLet me first say that one of the most underappreciated societal costs of the “Sex and the City” years was the needless elevation of vodka. Gin, in all of its vegetal varieties, is a much better match for the mix-ins that can spice up a holiday party. Add some Domaine de Canton (a ginger-flavored liqueur) or St. Germain (made from elderberry flowers) and top with something sparkling, and you have a better-than-gin-and-tonic surprise. In conclusion: more gin at parties, please!I’d also like to make a pitch here for Cynar and soda, with a nice slice of orange, which is also very easy to mix and a great way to start a party, even if that start includes listening to a colleague drone on about quantitative easing.TO: JENNIFERFROM: HELENEYou know I make that gin-and-ginger drink of yours all the time, right? You’ve neglected to mention that it should come with a warning label: DRINK ONE GLASS ONLY. I served it at the beginning of a dinner party last week, and while I wasn’t looking, one of my guests had helped himself to a second. Let’s just say that his dinner conversation sparkled.But I beg to differ with you on this anti-vodka business. My all-time favorite holiday drink is my patented grapefruit martini. Top-shelf vodka, fresh grapefruit juice (it is worth coughing up the extra $5), shaker, ice. Shake and strain into a chilled martini glass. Sip. Close your eyes and smile.If the grapefruit juice is super-tart, you can add a packet of Equal (yes, I know you’re violently opposed to that) or some simple syrup. But if you squeeze the grapefruits yourself, it will need no further embellishment. For a party, you obviously won’t be standing around squeezing grapefruits; hence, the trip to the supermarket. Simply make a pitcher of the vodka-juice mix, and then as people wander over to the bar, pour it into a shaker filled with ice and shake it up. For extra festiveness, float some chilled bubbly on top.I would offer to make this for the office Christmas party that’s coming up, but I don’t want to spend the whole party behind the bar again. If I put the pitchers out, will our work pals properly shake and strain the martinis themselves? I don’t like incompetent bartending, you know, and may start yelling at people if they do it wrong.Um, what is Cynar?TO: HELENEFROM: JENNIFERI’m not your Google. (It’s a bittersweet Italian digestive liqueur.)As for bartending, indulge your need for control and have your own party, but exert as little effort as possible. You can buy cheap glasses at Ikea or World Market, or even rent them, although the truth is that renting glasses can be almost as expensive as trekking to Ikea. Paper plates are a no, but clear plastic ones work. And whimsical paper napkins are a must. If you can’t cook, find your bliss in salted snacks that will cause your guests to become more fun, like sriracha peas or some melon wrapped in the most expensive pork you can find. Or sauté button mushrooms in garlic and butter. In lieu of hiring a bartender, stick to one cocktail that you’ve mixed ahead of time and that requires only a shake; then put your over-21 nephew behind the bar. Dim the lights, and you’re set.Have we forgotten anything? I made a quick call to Jim Meehan, a managing partner of the East Village speakeasy PDT, who often coughs up with some good drink recipes. He had a few thoughts.“Craft beer is becoming much more popular right now, and people are becoming a lot more fluent in it,” Mr. Meehan said, and I have to agree. So I will make colleagues bring their favorite 12-packs, and we may end up with some really fun drinks; those in the know might pick Anchor Brewing’s Christmas Ale, for instance, and Stella Artois has a lovely hard apple cider this year. One of our co-workers will bring crummy Korean beer, but there is nothing we can do about that.Also, let’s celebrate punch, which has the advantage of being made in advance. “Punches are simple,” Mr. Meehan pointed out. “There is this misconception that it looks and tastes like something from college.” A green tea punch, for instance, takes advantage of rum’s kick, and I love pomegranate juice mixed with something sparkling and some other fruit juice of your choice for balance.TO: JENNIFERFROM: HELENESo we’ve got punch, we’ve got great drink recipes, and I am sure we can balance it all out with some dry rieslings and a nice Côtes du Rhône. Anything else?TO: HELENEFROM: JENNIFERI’m really worried about the music.cookingcookingcookingAdvertisement