https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/business/workologist-supervisor-gift.html
Feeling Compelled to Give the Boss a Gift - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1817
AdvertisementSupported byThe WorkologistBy Rob WalkerI have worked for my employer for 10 years under multiple supervisors, who always have offices at a different location and whom I rarely see face to face. On two occasions, I have been expected to chip in for a present for a supervisor. The first time was for a former supervisor’s farewell present. When I declined to contribute, I received an email from my current supervisor saying my decision made her “sad.” The second time involved colleagues asking me to chip in for a present for my current supervisor after she’d had minor surgery. Again I declined. I do not mind chipping in for presents for colleagues, but feel that the pressure to pay for a gift for a supervisor is inappropriate. What is your take? A.M., NEW YORKThis is a good example of why workplace fund-raising plans — to buy a present, pay for a party, etc. — ought to be handled more thoughtfully than they usually are. Even when a gift will be presented as coming from everyone, a better method for actually collecting the cash is to stick with a system that’s both voluntary and anonymous: passing around a manila envelope, for instance, and asking for some suggested (but not compulsory or minimum) amount. Otherwise, it’s almost guaranteed that some will feel pressured, or even bullied, into contributing more than they want to.Would making it easier to opt out mean that less money gets raised? Probably. But a company isn’t founded and organized for the purpose of exchanging thoughtful and heartfelt presents. Such gestures are certainly nice, and can contribute to a pleasant work environment. But if you have to choose between a more modest gift and the risk of disgruntled or resentful colleagues, settle for the smaller present. (Or, if an organization concludes that goodbye presents and the like are vital to its culture, simply budget for them.)Of course, this does not describe your situation. I think you are well within your rights to decline to contribute, but there is a decent chance you will pay what amounts to a social cost for doing so: Your manager and other colleagues may, even unconsciously, suspect that on some level you’re not really a team player. I don’t think that’s fair, but it can occur anyway.It may help to explain your decision. Your personal rule about when such donations are appropriate certainly strikes me as reasonable. Explaining that you are on a tight budget to meet a personal savings goal, or some such, may do the trick. The point is to depersonalize the matter: It’s not about your feelings toward or judgment of the person receiving the gift, it’s a side effect of a strict personal policy. You might even suggest that the company revisit the way it handles such matters, to avoid precisely this sort of needless conflict between personal choices and office mores.While applying for a position I ultimately accepted, I was interviewed by someone who was friendly with one of my colleagues at the company I was trying to leave. He acknowledged this during the interview. Naturally, I asked him to keep our meeting confidential, since I did not want it to be public knowledge that I was looking around. He assured me he would do so.  I recently started at the new company, and I have learned that my interviewer — before my accepting the offer — not only informed his friend (my colleague at the time) that I was looking to leave, but also asked questions about me. While I respect the due diligence on a potential hire, he violated my confidence and lied to me. Am I naïve to trust this person in any capacity going forward? ANONYMOUSI’m assuming that when you say he agreed to keep the interview confidential, you provided some relevant reference to speak to instead; it seems surprising that a potential employer would flat-out agree not to talk to anybody with knowledge of your work situation at the time.Still, by your account, it’s no surprise that you would remain suspicious of this person. Given this and some of the details of your story, it might be wise to clear the air.That doesn’t mean a “you lied!” confrontation. It’s not clear how you learned about his having exactly the conversation he told you he wouldn’t have, but in approaching this, you should leave open the possibility of a miscommunication somewhere. Something like: “I gather that after our interview, you spoke to X. If so, I guess he must have said good things, and I’m happy it all worked out and I got this job. But I’m curious if you did, because I thought we’d agreed you wouldn’t talk to him, since it wasn’t common knowledge that I was considering another job.”One thing you’re looking for here is the possibility that your source doesn’t have the facts straight. Also: Maybe the interviewer remembers your conversation differently, or there’s more to the story that you don’t know. But what you’re really looking for is his attitude about the matter. If it’s frank and conciliatory, maybe you can trust that this was a one-off incident. If it’s indifferent or dismissive, he’s probably someone to be wary of.A final factor to consider is how much you’re likely to be interacting with this individual. If he’s someone you can easily steer clear of, then maybe that’s the simpler path. But if you’ll need to deal with him regularly, then some kind of conversation seems like a better bet than a permanent air of suspicion.Send your workplace conundrums to workologist@nytimes.com, including your name and contact information (even if you want it withheld for publication). The Workologist is a guy with well-intentioned opinions, not a professional career adviser. Letters may be edited.Advertisement