https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/14/opinion/the-argument-green-new-deal-brexit.html
Opinion | Is the Green New Deal a Leftist Fantasy? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
249
AdvertisementtranscriptWith Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David LeonhardtAnd what should Britain do about Brexit?Thursday, February 14th, 2019michelle goldbergI’m Michelle Goldberg.david leonhardtI’m David Leonhardt.ross douthatI’m Ross Douthat and this is “The Argument.” This week, does the Green New Deal symbolize the future of the Democratic Party or is it just leftist overreach?michelle cottleYou can’t promise everything and expect to be taken seriously.ross douthatThen the Brexit deadline is looming. What should England do?roger cohenDavid, Britain is independent. I’m sorry to interject.ross douthatAnd finally a recommendation.michelle cottleThe lovechild of Andrew Dice Clay and the little girl from “Brave” and that’s actually kind of it. [GOLDBERG LAUGHS]ross douthatThe Green New Deal, the hot policy topic of the moment, is a measure drafted by Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Senator Edward Markey that proposes a grand strategy to combat climate change while creating jobs in the U.S.<rep. alexandria ocasio-cortezWhat this really is is an organizing play.ross douthatIt includes a 10 year commitment to convert 100 percent of the power demand in the U.S. to clean, renewable, zero-emission energy sources, to upgrade all existing buildings to meet energy efficiency requirements and to expand high-speed rail. It also includes a lot of other commitments — to universal health care, a living wage, even a job guarantee — that don’t usually get described as “green,” which has critics of the measure calling it leftist overreach, socialism disguised as climate reform. David’s sitting this conversation out; he’ll be back in the second segment. Our colleague Michelle Cottle is joining us from D.C. Hey Michelle.michelle cottleHello Ross.ross douthatSo Michelle G., I’m fascinated by the Green New Deal and what it means for the Democrats. But you’re closer to the issue than I am. What’s your impression?michelle goldbergIt’s sort of astonishing that the Green New Deal in this incarnation has gone from something talked about, you know, among a small group of Democratic Socialists in New York to something that most of the Democratic candidates for president have now signed on to. The proposal is based — it’s a combination like, you know, as a lot of people have said, it’s a combination of climate mitigation and social democracy. And when I’ve talked to people who are close to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez or close to some of the organizations that have mobilized behind the Green New Deal, they make a couple of different arguments. One argument is that if you’re talking about a fundamental restructuring of the economy, which they are, then you need to give people a safety net. Right? That there’s going to be losers if you’re talking about transforming whole industries. And the way that you make that palatable for people is to make sure that there are good jobs and that they’re not going to lose their health care in the process of changing jobs. And so they will argue that this is actually, that these things actually go together. The other argument, which I think goes to the scope of their ambition, is that I think that they intuited that essentially the era of Reagan has come to an end. That the set of assumptions that have governed American politics since Ronald Reagan have now played themselves out and that we’re on the cusp of something new, and that there’s an opportunity to chart the horizon of what that would be. Right? That there is an opportunity to sort of chart the, like, ideological umbrella under which we’re all going to be operating going forward. And so you know, I think that if you see it that way then it makes sense to really go big. And to have this sort of grand mission statement for what you want the organizing values of your society to be.ross douthatYeah, I mean I’m genuinely fascinated by the politics of this because it seems to me that this bears some resemblance to some of the more radical ideas that tend to float around in Republican Party politics during primary campaigns and so on. Those ideas are usually more like a flat tax or “9-9-9” or, you know, we’re going to abolish six cabinet agencies and so on. But what’s striking to me is how fast we’ve gone from having this conceived of by basically the socialist flank of the Democratic Party to having a blueprint that is a much more aggressive version of the sort of centrist Green New Deal ideas, that someone like our colleague Tom Friedman would champion, joined to a pitch for social democracy. And all the Democratic presidential candidates are signing onto it. You have most of the prominent people running for the Democratic nomination feeling like this is something they have to get on board with.michelle goldbergRight, although I sort of think that they are signing on to the Green New Deal in theory as opposed to signing on to all the specifics, right? I mean Michael Bloomberg, should he run, is going to champion something that he’s going to call a Green New Deal but that is probably pretty different, you know, in the actual meat of it than what they’ve proposed here. And so I’m not sure that everyone who says, “Yes, I support a Green New Deal,” necessarily supports all the components of this particular non-binding resolution.ross douthatNo I think, I think that’s fair. But there still is no sense — there’s no felt sense that like this is an opportunity to distance yourself from the wackier ideas of the left or anything like that. All of the pressure at the moment is to say that even if you have doubts about the details you’re for something like this. And Michele C., I’m curious, Nancy Pelosi in a much quoted remark referred to the Green New Deal as “the green dream or whatever they call it,” which was interpreted by some people as suggesting she wanted to keep a certain distance. And I’m wondering if — is there a part of the Democratic Party right now that is really worried that they’re being dragged too far to the left?michelle cottleI don’t know that they’re worried yet that they’re being too far. There’s a lot of skepticism and I think the speaker has been pretty clear that she is aiming to keep anybody from running amok. I mean not only did she make the comment about the “green dream,” I mean she had not given the special climate change committee subpoena power or tasked them with hammering out a “Green New Dream.” She has been [COTTLE LAUGHS] talking in her best grandmother voice about how much she likes the enthusiasm behind the plan, which is about as patronizing as you can sound. That said, she knows that she’s got this new enthusiastic cohort to to contend with, and she is not looking to kind of go head-to-head so much.michelle goldbergYou know, I think that there’s a disjunction here between what is necessary and what is possible that makes, in some ways, sort of both sides of the debate seem irrational, right? I mean it’s true that what Ocasio-Cortez and other people are proposing, you know, under current circumstances is not going to happen and we would need like huge political change to actually get this or anything close to it done. I think it’s also true that if you really take the scale of the problem seriously — I just finished a book by David Wallace Wells called “The Uninhabitable Earth,” which is about what climate change is going to mean for people and society in the coming decades. And I just don’t know how anybody could read that and that and kind of not feel a sense of alarm and a sense that everything possible needs to be done to keep us from going to some of the upper estimates of what global warming could look like. And so in that sense the thing you would say about the Green New Deal is maybe that it’s not ambitious enough, that, you know, there’s things that it should include that it doesn’t. But I actually think that nothing that mainstream Democrats are going to, aren’t going to roll their eyes at because they understand the limits of the political system, is going to be sufficient to the crisis.michelle cottleYeah, one of the things that when you’re talking to Democratic skeptics — and I want to make that distinction between the climate deniers or whatever. We’re talking about more centrist Democrats and I understand the argument that if you’re going to make these huge economic changes you need to provide security, a sense of safety net. On the other hand these Democrats are like, you can’t promise everything and expect to be taken seriously as a blueprint for actual action. Now you can treat it like a vision statement. You can treat it as a wish list. You’re sitting around fantasizing with your friends about what the Democratic Party should be. But this is a Green New Deal and people are focusing on the green part but really it talks about promoting social justice. It talks about you know family leave, retirement security, health care. It’s throwing everything in there but the kitchen sink. That is not a plan. That is a vision statement that you then have to pick apart and work with. But it’s also going to get you made fun of and no one’s going to take it seriously as a legislative, kind of, roadmap.michelle goldbergWell what do you mean no one’s going to take it seriously? I mean obviously a lot of people are taking it seriously, right? I mean, and that’s why so many people are signing on to it. And I don’t think —michelle cottleNot, not politically.michelle goldbergWell I mean, the people who are rushing to co-sponsor it are taking it politically seriously, even if they don’t think that this is going to be enacted as a, you know, as a grand legislative package in the next couple of years. But it is a roadmap to the sort of laws that the new generation of Democrats would like to enact if and when they take power.michelle cottleSure. And if you talk to some Democrats, they’re betting that the people who’ve signed on haven’t read the thing. That half of them have no idea what’s in there. So I think it hasn’t reached the point yet where anybody has drilled down. It is more a question of not necessarily virtue signalling but it is definitely a, we know that we need to stand for something and we kind of generally agree with this direction. But now we need to work to make this more, I don’t know, concrete maybe.ross douthatBut I mean part of what’s fascinating too is that the political assumptions undergirding it are assumptions that the goal for Democrats is basically to, on climate, is not to find something that could someday get Republican votes. But to basically win big enough in some hopefully near-future election that you can start passing things with 60, let’s say 60 votes, or a post-filibuster landscape where you have this full tilt progressive majority. But I mean so much of climate policy in the U.S. and in most of the developed world has been built around the idea of getting right-of-center parties to buy in to carbon taxes, and to have that be the kind of technocratic solution. And the Green New Deal is not enthusiastic about carbon taxes, particularly. It sort of says, well, you know, that approach might be fine but really we want to just spend as much money as possible to sort of throw money at this problem. And that is a big strategic shift for the climate debate.michelle goldbergRight. So I think underlying that shift — and you know I think it’s a mistake to not talk about carbon taxes. It’s a mistake to tie the Green New Deal, I believe, to, you know, what they call modern monetary theory, right? This theory that you can sort of spend unlimited amounts in your own currency, absent catastrophic inflation. But when I talk to people who — like I’m thinking about this conversation I had with Sean McElwee, who’s this really significant figure in the new New Left. He founded a group called Data for Progress that poll tests a lot of these ideas. And what he said is something like, our argument is with the center left because the Republican Party is so unreasonable. You can’t talk to them. There’s sort of nothing for us to debate. They’re not going to sign on to anything. So it’s kind of a fool’s errand to try to craft something that would appeal to them. And I actually think that the legislative history of the last few years suggests that that’s the case.ross douthatDo you think, Michele C., that there are Democrats who are sort of on the center left, who care about this issue, who imagine themselves working with Republicans on it at some point in the near future?michelle cottleYeah I think always, especially in the Senate, you’re dealing with people who think in terms of compromise or the best deal possible. I mean politics is the art of the possible on some level. So what the Green New Deal strikes me as trying to do is pull the Democratic Party in a similar way that the Tea Party pulled the Republican Party to the right. This is trying to make sure that the Democratic Party doesn’t, you know, just kind of get swept along too much toward the center or the right. And it’s reminding them that they have progressive values and they need to kind of come back on a lot of these issues toward the left.ross douthatAnd Michelle G., as someone who is a little older than some of the progressives working on this right now and who bears more battle scars from, you know, the long wars with conservatives, does their confidence make you nervous?michelle goldbergYou know, the thing that makes me nervous is their confidence that like, people agree with us in polls, right? That people agree with all sorts of social democratic proposals when they’re phrased to certainly in polls. And, you know my experience in politics is like many years of like vastly overestimating the degree to which the American people agree with us.ross douthatBut what’s — so this is, to me, I mean you said something slightly dismissive about modern monetary theory and how that’s the weakest part of the plan. And to me as an observer that, you know, that’s a very risky part of the plan but politically it’s actually in certain ways the least crazy part, right?michelle goldbergRight and they’re smart, and they’re smart, right? It’s sort of a centrist fantasy that carbon taxes are practical in a way that some of these proposals are pie — you know to see carbon taxes is as practical and to see some of these proposals as pie in the sky, I’m not sure that that actually matches the political reality.ross douthatNo I don’t think it does at all. I mean I think basically the Green New Deal says in order to get people to buy into this, we’re going to tell them it’s not going to cost them that much. You know, we’re going to put it on the credit card. And we hope we basically spend our way to an energy breakthrough before the inflation spiral hits. And I don’t know if that’s any crazier, right?michelle cottleAlthough to be fair, what we have learned from the Republican Party in the last couple of years is that deficits don’t matter, right? You can do whatever you want and cut taxes as much as you want and spend whatever you want and nobody really cares. At least they certainly don’t these days, for the most part.michelle goldbergAnd they’re also — they’re also correct in surmising that the cost of climate change itself is going to be astronomical.ross douthatBut it’s a cost paid out across decades and decades in a society that, at least we hope, will be steadily richer and richer than it is today. Whereas the Green New Deal is basically saying we’re going to take this tremendous economic gamble up front, right now, you know, with this sort of, you know, I won’t call it a Soviet-style 10 year plan but it’s a 10 year plan, on the assumption that that upfront cost will be less than the sort of distributed cost over time.michelle cottleSo what you have to worry about here is how to balance the use of this, as one Democrat noted, as an organizing tool or a vision statement or whatever with the realpolitik situation of, at what point do you disappoint your base because you haven’t managed in 10 years to solve everything from the oppression of indigenous people to family leave to health care? And you wind up with a fairly bitter left on the just assumption that they kind of thought more was going to happen.michelle goldbergI don’t know I sort of think that the left will be more bitter if they feel like their leaders didn’t even try.michelle cottleYeah, I do think a conversation needs to be started about what does the Democratic Party stand for. I mean this is a problem they had with the Hillary Clinton campaign. So I do think as far as like a new vision for what the Democrats stand for that that conversation needs to be started.ross douthatAre the Democrats where conservatives were in 1979? Where they’re sort of poised to have their own ideological revolution that will reshape things for a long time in this Green New Deal is part of it. Or are they where Republicans, Tea Party Republicans were in 2010, where they thought they were poised to have an ideological revolution and there were so many structural roadblocks in American politics that it just all came to grief?michelle goldbergI mean I think that they are. I mean I like to think that they are where the where the conservative movement was in 1979 and I feel like in some ways the revolution is going to happen just sort of demographically, right? I mean millennials, who are much more both diverse and left wing than any generation before them, are going to be I believe the biggest voting bloc in 2020 and then kind of more politically significant going forward and then they’re followed by a generation that’s as left wing as they are. And so that political transformation I know the Democratic Party can be overreliant on demographics but nonetheless you know the young people are going to replace us.ross douthatMichelle C., as our honored guest I want to give you the last word. To what extent is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez really setting the agenda for Kamala Harris, Elizabeth Warren, Cory Booker and so on right now?michelle cottleI think this is kind of a discussion that’s going to happen early in the primaries. It will not be in the weeds enough for it to be a real issue. But of course climate change is going to be an issue, social justice and economic fairness. So in general it will be, I just don’t think that it’s going to take center stage.ross douthatOK. I’m just curious about when it fully becomes AOC’s party because I’m, just as an observer, really excited for that moment. So this was a lot of fun. Michelle do you want to stick around through and just, — through the Brexit segment and come back for our recommendation?michelle cottleAbsolutely that’d be great. Thanks.ross douthatFantastic. All right, we’re going to take a quick break now and when we come back David is going to M.C. a debate about the future of the United Kingdom.david leonhardtBrexit. You’ve seen a lot of headlines about Britain’s plans to leave the European Union.news clipsBrexit. Brexit. Brexit. Brexit. Brexit.david leonhardtBut I’m gonna go out on a limb and guess you haven’t read very many of those stories. Brexit seems complicated and repetitive. And if you’re an American it can feel very far away. But I’ve become fascinated by Brexit and I want to share my fascination with you during this segment. Because Brexit is not actually that complicated. And what will happen over the next month or two will shape the future of Britain, of Europe and of the Western world. Today we’re gonna have a debate about Brexit and we’re going to ask you to make your own decision. If you were Britain what would you do? Before we get into all of that let me give you the basics. In 2016, the British public voted to leave the European Union trading zone, which is known as the E.U.jenny watsonThis means that the U.K. has voted to leave the European Union. [CHEERING]david leonhardtBut the ballot initiative didn’t get into the details of how to leave and now neither the British Parliament nor the British people can agree on those details. There are three options for what will come next. Option one is known as “hard Brexit,” and it’s what will happen if Parliament doesn’t do anything else over the next few weeks. Britain will just leave the E.U. come March 29. Its agreements with Europe on travel, food, shipping, you name it, will be cancelled. Option two is the middle ground or “soft Brexit.” This is the one that Theresa May, the prime minister, has been pushing. Britain would leave the E.U., but it would still abide by some of Europe’s rules and still get some of the benefits. The trouble is option two is too soft for people who support “hard Brexit,” and it’s way too much for the nearly half of Britain that voted against leaving in the first place. Option three is a do over. It’s to hold another vote. This option has some obvious problems. It would essentially nullify a vote by the British people. But advocates for a revote say that people didn’t realize what Brexit really was when they voted for it back in 2016. They should have another chance to vote now that they do understand. So three options and Britain must choose only one. Today I’m joined by two excellent guests to help you decide. One is Steve Hilton. He used to be a top adviser to David Cameron, the British prime minister who set Brexit in motion. Steve now lives in the U.S. and has written a book called “Positive Populism.” He favors “hard Brexit.” The other is my colleague Roger Cohen, an Opinion columnist and former foreign editor of The Times. He recently wrote an impassioned case for a revote. Steve and Roger, welcome to “The Argument.”steve hiltonGreat to be with you.roger cohenThank you.david leonhardtSteve, you should go first. Will you please lay out for us what “hard Brexit” would look like?steve hiltonYes. My view is that “hard Brexit” is really the only Brexit. And the reason I say that is the nature of the Brexit vote itself and what that was all about, which is really national independence and sovereignty. And that was at the heart of the argument for leaving the E.U. It wasn’t really about trade or economics it was about a country electing people who could make decisions about what goes on in that country and then be accountable to the people. And if you look at the E.U. and the way it works, it’s really one giant institutionalised violation of democratic norms because, as I experienced when I worked in 10 Downing Street, as you mentioned, most of the activity of the U.K. government was implementing decisions made by the E.U. And in that sense the E.U. is not just like a trade deal or some European version of Nafta. The better comparison is with the federal government here in America. And the difference is that at least the federal government is elected, at least the president is elected and Congress is elected. Whereas the E.U. force for driving policy forward, the E.U. Commission, is not elected, it’s appointed. And in that sense all the alternatives to a “hard Brexit” in the end still leave the U.K. government subject to rules developed and implemented by an unelected body based in Brussels. In that sense it’s not Brexit at all. And that’s why the only way to actually fulfil the vote, the majority vote, to leave the E.U. is what is known as a “hard Brexit.”david leonhardtNow I’ve read a lot of descriptions of what a “hard Brexit” might look like. So can you describe for me — let’s imagine it’s March 29 and we actually get the “hard Brexit,” what you think of is the only Brexit. What do you think that actually looks like and why doesn’t it scare you as much as it scares a lot of other people?steve hiltonBecause if the U.K. left the E.U. it would be like most other countries in the world who are not in the E.U. And those countries manage perfectly well to live and trade and prosper outside of being a member of the E.U. To take some of those specific examples, they are mentioned frequently by those who are worried about a “hard Brexit” but they’ve been knocked back every single time by the people who really know. That’s not me. Good example in terms of flights where, you hear this all the time, flights won’t be able to take off and land and air travel will be completely disrupted. They’re perfectly prepared for a situation where the U.K. is not in the E.U. One of the big problems, I think, with this argument that everything would grind to a halt if there isn’t some negotiated outcome is that it asserts far too much primacy, I think, for bureaucracy and government in terms of how society and the economy really works. In the end businesses want to sell to each other. Companies want to trade with each other. Countries want to get along with each other. And that’s how most countries in the world operate who don’t happen to be members of the E.U. So I think some of this is so overblown. I don’t want to say there’ll be no disruption. That would be ridiculous. But the idea that you can’t cope with this I think is completely overstated.david leonhardtRoger I know you’re much more worried about the prospect of a “hard Brexit.”roger cohenYeah, sure David. With infinite respect for Steve, the notion that David Cameron’s government was some kind of stenographer for the European Union is just absurd. Britain was in the European Union. It was not however in the euro. It had control of its own monetary policy, its own currency. Britain was a sovereign nation and the slogan of the Brexiteers, as they were called, “Take back control,” take back control of what? Well not take back control of the borders not take back control of monetary policy. No, it was some nostalgic fantasy in essence to foist all that on the European Union was bolstered by a series of lies. Lies about Turkey being about to join the European Union and 80 million Turks about to descend on Britain. Lies about money that would be given to the N.H.S. in Britain. Three hundred and fifty million pounds a week going to the E.U. that could be spent on the N.H.S. As for “hard Brexit,” and I mean I hope there isn’t one, you could have, certainly, chaos in Ireland where a hard border would immediately go up. At some point I’m hoping that Labour will see the light despite Jeremy Corbyn and plenty of — democracy can think again. You know, the United States can think again a couple of years from now about President Trump if it wants to. And this should be taken not on a fantasy Brexit, which is what we had in 2016, but a reality Brexit. Now we know. Here are the terms. This is it. Do you want it? Do you want May’s deal? Do you want no deal? Or do you want to remain? And that would make sense.david leonhardtSteve let me ask you: it does feel to me like there was a story that the Leavers, the pro-Brexit crowd, told to the British people that now that the British people have actually had a chance to see the details of Brexit, it does seem like the story that they told wasn’t consistent with reality. Am I wrong about that?steve hiltonNo, there’s a real truth to that, to what you say there. And the reason for that is that the Leavers ended up not running the process. The process actually got taken over for various kind of catastrophic misjudgments very quickly after the vote by sort of internal warfare within the Conservative Party that we needn’t bore our listeners with. But the end result of all of that was that the people who made those positive and exciting and open arguments about how Britain could thrive and prosper and not turn its back on Europe but actually continue to engage with Europe, but also be more outward looking and engage with the wider world. All of that was lost because the people who made those arguments didn’t end up running the process. Theresa May ended up running the process and she was, let’s all remember, against leaving. She was for staying within the E.U. Just, just one quick thing I’d say, a point of agreement with Roger, I think is very important to say that he’s absolutely right in that it’s not correct to try and blame the E.U. for all the things that have gone wrong that contributed to the vote. And I’ve argued all along that the real answer to that is not leaving the E.U., but what you do with the newfound freedom once you’ve left. And the centerpiece of that has got to be policy, for example to equip people with the skills to prosper in the 21st century economy, building infrastructure, all those sorts of things. Which Roger’s correct, they have nothing to do with the E.U. I do agree about that.david leonhardtAnd how does Britain do that in a way, if it were to become independent, that it can’t do now? Is that like a sort of Reagan revolution for Britain?roger cohenDavid, Britain is independent. I’m sorry to interject.david leonhardtNo that’s a fair point, Roger.roger cohenBritain is independent and Steve’s phrase, the one he just used, “newfound freedom.” I’m sorry. Newfound freedom? Do you — has anyone visiting Britain in the last 20, 30, 40 years felt he or she was in an unfree country?steve hiltonNo I completely agree, it’s not about the freedom of the citizens who live there. It’s about the freedom of the people, the government the people elect to actually implement policy. I mean you know most of what the government was doing was implementing E.U. directives. The freedom I’m talking about is mainly in the regulatory arena.david leonhardtO.K. so Roger, let me ask you about revote. I mean in 2016 Britain voted 52 percent to 48 percent to leave. And I think there are a lot of people, including people who were really against Brexit, who find the idea of essentially saying, “You know what actually that vote by the country doesn’t count. Let’s do it again,” to be worrisome because it feels anti-democratic. So can you walk us through why you think a revote is the right thing to do?roger cohenI don’t think there are any good outcomes and this is not a good outcome, David, but I think it’s the best of the options at this point. You yourself said to Steve and Steve I think, if I heard him correctly, agreed with you that the vote of 2016 was held on the basis of a series of lies or misleading statements. Denmark, Ireland, other E.U. members have reconsidered earlier votes and this is a decision for the ages. This is a decision for the next two three generations. I suppose it’s conceivable that Britain having come out could think again and even as you know the the vote of 2016 was thinking again about the referendum of 1975 which came out more than 60 percent in favour of staying in the E.U. So I think people say there’ll be blood in the streets. Britain will be divided. Britain is divided. This is a very fierce and contentious debate.david leonhardtSteve, is there any part of you that would actually welcome a second vote and then win it again and then remove any doubt about what the British people want?steve hiltonYes. I’m not implacably opposed to a second vote. I think that certainty is what is needed above, all clarity and certainty about what’s going to happen. That’s that’s my argument for a “hard Brexit,” at least we know what where we stand and people can plan accordingly. That also applies to a second vote. So I think it’s if you like the second best option after a “hard Brexit,” much better than continuing to debate forever and ever. I think there’s a couple of observations I’d make though. First of all, there’s not just been one vote for Brexit. There’s actually been two votes for Brexit because there’s been a general election. There was a general election in 2017 and a big majority of candidates who then got elected to Parliament ran on a promise that they would implement Brexit. Secondly, I think that those who advocate this, I think they do have an assumption that if Britain voted again it would it would reverse the vote. I don’t think that is a safe assumption at all. I think that the anger generated by the request to vote again might play a part. But also remember that if they look at opinion polls, you know — before the campaign got going the first time it looked outlandish, the idea that people would vote to leave. So I don’t you can rely on getting a different result. But the third point I’d make is that when the proponents of a second referendum say, look, now we know what it’s all about. And people didn’t have the full information. I just would recall that the campaign against leaving, the Remain campaign, its entire message was based on the worst-case scenario. All the same things that we’re hearing now attached to a no deal exit. So I think it’s not accurate to say that people were voting on the basis of different information and that now you’d have new information. I think it’d be the same arguments entirely all over again. And you might get the same result.david leonhardtLet me just make, very briefly, the version of the Theresa May case, which is look, her deal is consistent with the vote of the British people. It is not what the “hard Brexit” crowd wants. It’s certainly not what the remain crowd wants but it moves Britain a little further from Europe while honoring this vote. Isn’t that — as muddle through of an option as it is — isn’t that both the most likely and the fairest option here? Steve why don’t you go first.steve hiltonI do think it’s the most likely. The problem with it is that everything you said about it is true but it only lasts for two years. It’s a transition agreement not a long term agreement. And so the arguments about all the things we’re discussing now, what is completely consuming the political debate in the U.K. — about whether to be in the single market, whether to be in the customs union, what kind of trading relationship, what do you do about the citizens living in each other’s countries — all of these things will still be there and unresolved under Theresa May’s plan. Because her plan is a withdrawal agreement. It’s a transition agreement. It is not an answer to, “What is the future relationship between Britain and the E.U.?” That’s why I think it prolongs the uncertainty and that’s why I think it’s bad.david leonhardtRoger what do you think about the May plan?roger cohenI agree with with Steve. I think it is the most likely, just. I think the prime minister is trying to run down the clock and scare people. I think it’s better than Steve’s proposal of, you know, “Let’s just get on with it.” Again, I get back to the enormity of this decision and it was foisted upon people through lies. And Britain should have the chance to think again.david leonhardtWell one of the reasons I’m so absorbed by this story is that it’s legitimately uncertain. We don’t know what’s going to happen over the next five or six weeks so I really appreciate both your coming on and I hope you’ll be willing to come back once we find out what’s actually going to happen over the next two months.steve hiltonPleasure.roger cohenSure. Thanks David.david leonhardtThank you Roger. Thank you Steve. Listeners we really do want to know which of these three options you would pick. So if you have an opinion, call and leave us a voicemail at 347-915-4324. Play Britain, tell us what you’d do and we may play you on the show.ross douthatSo now Michelle, Michelle and I are back — I get a kick out of saying that — for our weekly recommendation. And this week it’s Michelle G. stands for Goldberg’s turn. Michelle, what do you have for us?michelle goldbergO.K. so this is sort of obvious because this show is aimed like a laser at my very particular demographic but I am going to recommend the new Netflix show “Russian Doll,” with the sublime Natasha Lyonne. And it sort of is like a more, like a darker, “Groundhog Day” in certain ways. Natasha Lyonne keeps dying and ending up back in this bathroom at her 36th birthday party. And she’s sort of trying to figure out what is happening to her and what she has the power to change. If I heard that description I wouldn’t necessarily want to watch it but I just — it’s so funny and delightful. I mean just partly because she is so wonderful. People who really love New York, and I count myself as one of them, I feel like will see it as one of the more authentic New York shows that’s ever been made. I mean it that just gets the texture of the city in a way that a lot of New York based shows don’t or at least the texture of the city as I’ve as I’ve lived it.michelle cottleYeah. I have to completely agree with you. I have binge watched the whole thing. So I just went crazy with it. It has this great feel to it. If you just describe it it is like O.K., so it’s “Groundhog” without the comedy or whatever. But it’s not and it’s a great showcase for Natasha Lyonne who is fantastic. She has this kind of over-the-top shtick which at one point she describes herself as what would be the lovechild of Andrew Dice Clay and the little girl from “Brave” and that’s actually kind of it. [GOLDBERG LAUGHS] So I think that Ross should go out and completely indulge himself.michelle goldbergAnd, you know, I also — I also have to say it’s just, it’s so — again maybe this is like a really predictable observation, but I just love the fact that you have this show about a woman in her mid-thirties that’s sort of like an existential detective show as opposed to, you know, like, a romantic quest. I feel like you don’t really get a show about a woman that’s not really in any real sense about her love life.michelle cottleYeah. She’s completely driving this train and she’s — if anything, she’s the unromantic person in this thing, as opposed to this guy who’s in it. And she is just brilliant with the whole thing.ross douthatThe show is called “Russian Doll.” It’s on Netflix. Thank you Michelle and Michelle. That’s our show for this week.michelle goldbergThank you.michelle cottleBye guys!ross douthatThis week’s show was produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media and edited by Lacy Roberts. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn and we had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett, Ian Prasad Philbrick and Francis Ying. And our theme was composed, as always, by Allison Leyton-Brown.Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Apple Podcasts | RadioPublic | Stitcher | Spotify | Google PlayThis week on “The Argument,” is the Green New Deal a symbol of the future of the Democratic Party? Or is it just socialism disguised as climate reform? Michelle Cottle of the Times editorial board joins Ross Douthat and Michelle Goldberg to discuss.Then, David Leonhardt moderates a debate about the past, present and future of Britain’s continuing struggle to leave the European Union. Times columnist Roger Cohen favors a second Brexit referendum, while Steve Hilton — the Fox News host and former aide to David Cameron, the British prime minister who set the 2016 referendum in motion — makes the case for a “hard Brexit.”And finally, Michelle Goldberg recommends a new Netflix show so good it’s worth reliving over and over and over again.Background Reading:Ross Douthat on the perils and promise of the Green New DealDavid Leonhardt on the Brexit mess and why the Green New Deal is bad policy but good politicsRoger Cohen on why Britain needs a second Brexit referendumMichelle Cottle on the new Democratic majority in the House  and Trump versus PelosiSteve Hilton, “Positive Populism: Revolutionary Ideas to Rebuild Economic Security, Family and Community in America”I’ve been an Op-Ed columnist since 2009, and I write about politics, religion, pop culture, sociology and the places where they all intersect. I’m a Catholic and a conservative, in that order, which means that I’m against abortion and critical of the sexual revolution, but I tend to agree with liberals that the Republican Party is too friendly to the rich. I was against Donald Trump in 2016 for reasons specific to Donald Trump, but in general I think the populist movements in Europe and America have legitimate grievances and I often prefer the populists to the “reasonable” elites. I’ve written books about Harvard, the G.O.P., American Christianity and Pope Francis; I’m working on one about decadence. Benedict XVI was my favorite pope. I review movies for National Review and have strong opinions about many prestige television shows. I have three small children, two girls and a boy, and I live in New Haven with my wife.I’ve been an Op-Ed columnist at The New York Times since 2017, writing mainly about politics, ideology and gender. These days people on the right and the left both use “liberal” as an epithet, but that’s basically what I am, though the nightmare of Donald Trump’s presidency has radicalized me and pushed me leftward. I’ve written three books, including one, in 2006, about the danger of right-wing populism in its religious fundamentalist guise. (My other two were about the global battle over reproductive rights and, in a brief detour from politics, about an adventurous Russian émigré who helped bring yoga to the West.) I love to travel; a long time ago, after my husband and I eloped, we spent a year backpacking through Asia. Now we live in Brooklyn with our son and daughter.I’ve worked at The Times since 1999 and have been an Op-Ed columnist since 2016. I caught the journalism bug a very long time ago — first as a little kid in the late 1970s who loved reading the Boston Globe sports section and later as a teenager working on my high school and college newspapers. I discovered that when my classmates and I put a complaint in print, for everyone to see, school administrators actually paid attention. I’ve since worked as a metro reporter at The Washington Post and a writer at BusinessWeek magazine. At The Times, I started as a reporter in the business section and have also been a Times Magazine staff writer, the Washington bureau chief and the founding editor of The Upshot.My politics are left of center. But I’m also to the right of many Times readers. I think education reform has accomplished a lot. I think two-parent families are good for society. I think progressives should be realistic about the cultural conservatism that dominates much of this country. Most of all, however, I worry deeply about today’s Republican Party, which has become dangerously extreme. This country faces some huge challenges — inequality, climate change, the rise of China — and they’ll be very hard to solve without having both parties committed to the basic functioning of American democracy.Tune in on iTunes, Google Play, Spotify, Stitcher or wherever you listen to podcasts. Tell us what you think at argument@nytimes.com. Follow Michelle Goldberg (@michelleinbklyn), Ross Douthat (@DouthatNYT) and David Leonhardt (@DLeonhardt) on Twitter. This week’s show is produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media, and edited by Lacy Roberts. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn. We had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett and Ian Prasad Philbrick. Our theme is composed by Allison Leyton-Brown.Advertisement