https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/12/automobiles/is-it-legal-for-corvette-to-eavesdrop.html
Is It Legal for Corvette to Eavesdrop? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1872
AdvertisementSupported byTechnologyBy John R. QuainGeneral Motors may have to take the sting out of its new Stingray. The 2015 Corvette offers a personal video recording option that lets owners surreptitiously record video and audio when the car is in the hands of other drivers — like parking attendants. But now the automaker is concerned that the so-called valet mode may run afoul of eavesdropping laws in some states.The laws in question involve audio recording only, and require that both parties give consent to be recorded. The Corvette’s recorder not only stores video shot through the windshield, but also data on speed and acceleration as well as audio recordings from inside the car.On a recent test drive of the Stingray, the HD video feature faithfully recorded speed and G-forces and other telemetry data. It also recorded audio inside the car, including the radio and some impromptu car-karaoke singalongs. Spoken conversation was less discernible above the road noise.Nevertheless, in September General Motors sent a notice to dealers and letters to owners warning about the possible legal issue and asking them to refrain from using valet mode, according to Monte Doran, a Chevrolet spokesman.“We wanted to make sure the car is legal to use in all 50 states,” Mr. Doran said in a telephone interview. He said the company was working on possible software solutions, including the possibility of switching off the audio recording in valet mode or a warning display notifying drivers when a recording was being made.Howard M. Wasserman, a professor of law at Florida International University in Miami, said in a telephone interview: “It depends on how states interpret consent: Does it mean notice or something more affirmative than that?” To satisfy some consent requirements, he added, a driver — or passenger — may have to say, “Yes, I agree to be recorded.” Ultimately, it may not be the responsibility of Chevrolet, but rather of Corvette owners, not to violate state laws. With a top speed of 178 miles per hour, it’s easy for the car to exceed posted limits, but Chevrolet is not responsible for owners who choose to speed.“I think speeding is a great analogy,” Professor Wasserman said. “The liability would rest with the driver. What’s unlawful is how I used the device.”Advertisement