https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/04/books/review/alan-hollinghurst-sparsholt-affair.html
Scandal Puts a Gay Father in Prison. What of His Gay Son, a Generation Later? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2182
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Adam KirschTHE SPARSHOLT AFFAIR By Alan Hollinghurst 417 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $28.95.Alan Hollinghurst’s new novel is a portrait of a man who isn’t there. It’s not that David Sparsholt doesn’t appear in the novel that bears his name. On the contrary, we’re continually getting glimpses of him and hearing tantalizing rumors. Over the course of a story that spans 70 years and three generations, we learn about Sparsholt’s heroic career as a pilot during World War II, his successful business — and then, with a shock, about the political sex scandal, the “Sparsholt Affair,” that made him a household name.Yet the man himself always remains at a distance. Indeed, he initially appears as a literal shadow. The year is 1940, and Oxford is largely empty — most of the male students have been drafted, or are about to be — when a small group of friends happen to spy David in his room across the quad: “The source of the shadow moved slowly into view, a figure in a gleaming singlet, steadily lifting and lowering a pair of hand-weights.” At first, no one knows the young Adonis’s name, but his physique alone is enough to make one of the group, Evert Dax, fall madly in love with him. Another, Peter Coyle, manages to persuade Sparsholt to sit for a portrait, a nude chalk sketch. And a third, Freddie Green — who is the narrator of this section of the novel — spends a long night during the Blitz on the roof of the college with Sparsholt, watching for enemy bombers.In their tiny undergraduate world, these reverberations of feeling constitute a major event — a “Sparsholt affair” of its own, before the later, public one is even imaginable. This is the subject of the novel’s opening section, a self-contained drama rich with seduction, betrayal and exploitation. Peter and Evert maneuver fiercely for David’s affections, regardless of the fact that he has a fiancée; and one of them gets what he wants, for a price. Still, Freddie supposes the whole thing will soon be forgotten: “It had already assumed its true scale, something fleeting, and entirely personal, too hidden to rate even a footnote in the history of its time. I doubt anyone has spoken a word of it till now.”But a writer, according to Henry James, should be one of those on whom nothing is lost; and Hollinghurst, a very Jamesian writer, doesn’t allow this “affair” to slip into oblivion. Instead, it turns out to be the overture in a long and complex saga — five substantial episodes that take us, in long leaps, from the Blitz to the age of smartphones. Structurally, this makes “The Sparsholt Affair” very similar to Hollinghurst’s previous novel, “The Stranger’s Child,” which dealt with the life and literary afterlife of an English poet who died in World War I.Readers of that book — or of Hollinghurst’s earlier “The Line of Beauty,” which won the Man Booker Prize — will find much that is familiar here, stylistically and thematically. As always, Hollinghurst writes classically beautiful prose, which like James’s is constantly intelligent, alert and mobile. Though he is a wonderful noticer and describer — of skies, paintings, bodies — it is his party scenes that are most famous, and justly so. Few writers are so good at capturing the currents of intention and emotion that circulate in a crowded room.There is something particularly English about this talent, and it can produce a very English comedy of polite noncommunication. In one scene, a group of guests at a party — actually, at the wake of Freddie Green, who has died half a century after we first met him — are standing outside as it starts to rain. “It’s hardly raining at all,” one says, and another agrees, “It’s quite nice to be out, isn’t it”; and then, “with a sudden collective coming to their senses everyone in the garden walked, almost ran, back into the house.” To understand what people really want, Hollinghurst suggests, you have to ignore what they say and pay attention to what they do — especially when it comes to sex.The novel’s second section leaps forward 20 years, and the focus shifts to Johnny Sparsholt, the son of David, whose life we will follow for the remainder of the book. It is the 1960s, and David is a prosperous middle-aged man, a war hero with a thriving business. The reader, who knows more about Johnny’s father than he does himself, can pick up on the sexual undertones of David’s friendship with Clifford Haxby, a mysteriously intimate presence in their lives.But Johnny notices nothing, or almost nothing; he is too deeply involved in his own hopeless love for his French friend, Bastien. The previous summer, the two boys had a passionate, exploratory affair. But this summer Bastien is visiting Johnny in Cornwall, and it’s plain that he is now attracted to women — including Johnny’s own mother. Being gay is, in a quite direct sense, Johnny’s legacy; but it’s a legacy he at first doesn’t know how to deal with. Indeed, at this stage of the story, gay sex was still a crime in Britain. That’s why, when David Sparsholt and Clifford Haxby are exposed as having a sexual relationship with a member of Parliament, it becomes a national scandal that sends David to prison.All of this, however, takes place off the novel’s stage. We don’t learn about it until the third section, when Johnny, now a longhaired painter in his early 20s, comes to London to begin his career. Every time he introduces himself, we see people do a double take; some are kindly reticent, others blatantly curious. But no one can avoid associating the name with gayness — which sets Johnny a peculiar kind of challenge. How can he reclaim homosexuality from what it was to his father — something secretive, guilty, deniable — and lead a different kind of gay life?As it turns out, that is precisely what Johnny manages to do, and the rest of the novel tells a fundamentally happy story. The legacy he couldn’t receive directly from his father is passed down to him instead by a group of gay writers and artists who take him on as a protégé — a group that includes Evert Dax, his father’s lover from long ago. Evert’s London house, in Cranley Gardens, becomes Johnny’s new home, the place where he forges a different kind of family, based on affinity rather than blood. The times allow him possibilities his father could never have dreamed of, and Hollinghurst — who belongs to the same generation as Johnny — writes with subtlety and sympathy about all the stages of his progress, from youthful exploration to middle-aged partnership to the rekindling of desire late in life.As the story moves forward in time, Hollinghurst achieves the kind of symphonic effect we normally associate with much longer books, like Proust’s “In Search of Lost Time” or Anthony Powell’s “A Dance to the Music of Time.” People we first met as students in the 1940s return in new guises: A writer is famous, then forgotten, then the subject of scholarly revival; the teenage David turns into a father, then a grandfather. The effect is moving, and Hollinghurst writes with a wisdom and understanding only available to an experienced writer working with his favorite themes. By the end of the novel, the mystery of David Sparsholt hasn’t quite been solved, but it has served its purpose — as the absent center of a beautiful and complex design.Adam Kirsch’s most recent book is “The Global Novel: Writing the World in the 21st Century.”Advertisement