https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/04/well/family/senioritis-high-school-transition-college.html
How to Cure the New Senioritis? Make Yourself Your Senior Project - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2498
AdvertisementSupported byThe end of senior year is now often characterized by a sense of purposelessness. Here are five ways high school seniors can connect with what matters to them.By Ned JohnsonAs most college-bound high school seniors learn where they’ve gotten in and decide where they’re going, many feel that the pressure is off. Whether they are celebrating acceptances to their dream schools or coping with rejections, nearly all realize at this point that the die has been cast: The push for high school grades that used to drive everything suddenly matters much less.“Senioritis” used to have positive connotations for students. It meant coasting through their last semester in high school in anticipation of college entry in the fall. Today that mood has shifted. Many students — and their parents — have been driven to believe that high school is merely a four-year audition for the right college. A result? Eighteen-year-olds who feel their lives are not really driven by them.Rather than being a time of freedom, the new senioritis is characterized by a sense of purposelessness.Without an external motivator (reward of college admission or threat of college denial), far too many students have little idea of what to do or why.Psychologists use the terms “external” versus “internal” control, which is the sense that someone other than the individual is responsible for his success or failure. School, and especially the college admissions process, very much fosters this tendency. Students look to teachers and parents for cues to what matters and try to imagine what they need to do to meet the approval of admissions officials. It’s a far cry from reflecting on a more pressing question: “What matters to me?”It is common for many students, when denied admission to their dream college, to lament that “it’s not fair” or that they’ve “wasted all of this effort,” as though their work as students in high school and their aspirations for college were merely transactional rather than part of their development as learners and, more so, as people. In the aftermath of a rejection, more students than I can count have told me they should have gone to an easier high school or taken easier (or harder) classes, taken more or fewer AP classes, or should have dropped sports, music or debate “to get better grades.” Typically in this situation, students and their parents cast about for some path or reason that would have delivered the result they wished for. They rarely reflect on the possibility that the sport, class or activity they engaged in may pay off down the road in other ways, through a talent developed or interest kindled. Many of these kids feel that the whole point of working hard in high school is so they can get in to an even harder college, then move on to a future that they know little more about than that it will be hard-charging. It is easy to understand how painfully the rejection hits, since the process has all been framed around the outcome. In the second semester of senior year, students are still engaged with the same people and activities of the last four years, but the terms, pressures and motivations have changed.For the next few months, the rules are very different. Teachers and parents complain that they can’t get teenagers to do anything. Some have even proposed eliminating senior year.But I see the end of senior year as an opportunity for kids to figure out their inner motivation, post college acceptance.For kids who have been grinding for too long, the second semester can be downtime to recharge. But I also encourage students to use this time with intention, as it will help them enormously to be in touch with what matters to them. They can make themselves their senior project. Here are some suggestions.Go deep into things that matter to you, especially what you didn’t have time for or seemed “unimportant” for college admissions. A senior I know who hopes to study medicine used her second semester to train as an EMT. It was a great way to see firsthand whether medicine appealed at a boots-on-the-ground level and whether she was really suited to the field. It also ended up being a well-paying part-time job.Learn how to run your own life. Make a list of adult or college skills you don’t know how to do, like automobile maintenance or cooking. I’ve heard of college kids, clueless as to basic kitchen skills, turning to YouTube videos to learn how to make hot dogs. If you haven’t yet learned to drive, that’s a skill that also belongs on this list. There are real upsides to Uber, but it isn’t yet everywhere. And you may face a situation where a friend is unfit to drive and someone needs to step up.Try looking for a part-time job — on your own. I was visiting a friend’s business recently when he picked up the phone. It was someone calling to confirm the time of a job interview for a recent college grad named Ben. The caller was Ben’s mom. My friend said, “Well, please tell Ben his interview is canceled and that he should have called himself.”Like anything that matters, learning how to enter, manage and (when necessary) exit relationships benefits from experience. A 2017 study in Child Development found that young people today are less likely to have dated than young people did during the ’90s; perhaps they are more focused on passing classes than passing notes. According to the General Social Survey, more than half of young adults, aged 18 to 34, do not have a steady romantic partner. A 2013 New York Times piece recounted the “hookup culture” at Ivy League universities, where students shared views like “A relationship is like taking a four-credit class,” or “I could get in a relationship, or I could finish my film.” A friend who has been an independent college counselor for decades wistfully observes that “Nobody believes me when I tell them, but who you marry will matter much more than where you go to college.” If the first seven semesters of high school were college prep, perhaps let the last one be more about relationship prep.Go technology-free for a week — or even a day. Digital downtime is a challenge but can also be an awakening as to the ways that technology impacts our thought processes and ability to pay attention — a recognition students can take to college and beyond. And, while many believe college is where they will develop a coherent sense of self, it can only help to begin that process in senior year.Ned Johnson is the president and founder of PrepMatters in Washington, D.C., and the co-author of “The Self-Driven Child: The Science and Sense of Giving Your Kids More Control Over Their Lives.”Advertisement