http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/dining/wine-school-rioja.html
Exploring the Middle Ground in Riojas Reservas - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1968
AdvertisementSupported byWine SchoolBy Eric AsimovWine School, a monthly column, invites you to drink wine with Eric Asimov. November’s wine was Rioja Reservas; Mr. Asimov shares his reaction to the wine and addresses readers’ thoughts and questions below the assignment. Click here to read the tasting notes.Spain is one of the most exciting countries for wine in the world. Though wine has been made there for centuries, only in the last 50 years has Spain begun to overcome a political and economic legacy that long held back quality, creativity and renewal. Aside from sherry, only one Spanish region has achieved an international reputation that lasted through the entire 20th century up to the present: Rioja.Yet even Rioja has not been immune to the ferment that has recently lifted so many moribund Spanish regions into the modern international wine trade. Debates over style, viticulture, cellar techniques, label designations — even the very organization of the trade — have transformed Rioja from a somewhat sleepy area into a vital, energetic region. All sorts of Rioja are available now, from the most classic, made with singular traditional techniques and using a combination of indigenous grapes, tempranillo, garnacha, mazuelo and graciano; to wines made by more modern, though more homogenous, methods.To understand the arc of Rioja’s evolution, I believe, one must begin with wines that skew toward the distinctively traditional, which are unlike any others. And so, this month we will explore Rioja Reservas, wines that are required to be aged for at least three years, including one in barrels, before they can be released. In some cases, though, producers will age these wines far longer before releasing them. This gives us the rare opportunity at Wine School to experience and discuss the effects of aging on wine.They are:La Rioja Alta Viña Ardanza Reserva 2005 (Skurnik Wines, New York) $33R. López de Heredia Rioja Viña Bosconia Reserva 2003 (David Bowler Wine, New York) $35Muga Rioja Reserva 2009 (Martin Scott Wines, Lake Success, N.Y.) $25Other Reservas to seek out include Señorío de P. Peciña (superb if you can find it), CVNE’s Imperial and Viña Real, Marqués de Murrieta, Contino, López de Heredia’s Viña Tondonia, Remelluri, Luis Cañas and Faustino.No doubt you’ll encounter many other Riojas. Some may be labeled “crianza,” which must be aged for two years, including one in barrels. Others may be called “gran reserva,” which require five years of aging, including two in barrels. Well-aged gran reservas can be sublime. Other Riojas will carry no age statement beyond the vintage date. These tend to come from more experimental producers who want to emphasize other traits in their wines.The most traditional examples are aged in American oak, which seems to have a special affinity for Rioja. I’m generally not a fan of overt aromas and flavors of oak in wine. But Rioja is an exception. The mellow combination of aged wine with the gentle, cushioning effect of the oak is beautiful.Updated Dec. 1, 2014In an age when humanity lands a spacecraft on a comet and reconstructs the genomes of long-extinct animals, it may seem ludicrous to be perplexed by a glass of wine. Yet these small moments of bewilderment are integral to the best wines, which, like all that is beautiful, rise above definition.Chief among wine’s mysteries is how and why it ages. By aging, I don’t mean simply enduring over years, youthful fruit and fragrances intact but relatively unchanged. I mean evolving, from a primary state of freshness and rough vitality to vigorous middle age, when grace, complexities and nuances tantalize and enthrall, through a long period of gentle decline and resolution, which offers its own subtleties and allure until, gradually and finally, the wine flickers into opacity.Why is it that some wines age and others do not? What conditions encourage aging? And what happens to a wine as it ages? We do know that wines age best when stored in cool, dark, humid, tranquil conditions. But there is a lot that we don’t know, possibly because science hasn’t committed itself to finding the answers, and much of what we assume to be true in fact is not.Most wine authorities insist, for example, that Beaujolais and fino sherry must be drunk young and fresh because they cannot age. What these doggedly repeated platitudes really mean, however, is that mass-produced Beaujolais and fino sherry cannot age. When made with fine materials handled with meticulous care, these wines evolve beautifully.Here at Wine School, we refuse to be bound by clichés and bromides. Rather than bone up with textbooks as if wine were some sort of junior-high requirement, we go right to the primary source material, the wine itself. Each month, we focus on a particular type of wine, drinking it attentively in a relaxed, natural setting, with food, family or friends. The aim is to achieve a clearer, more confident sense of our own tastes by carefully noting reactions over the course of a meal. Drinking, rather than tasting, offers the opportunity to meet a good wine on its own terms, to see the entire movie play out rather than settle for a single still shot.Aging was foremost in mind this month as we examined Rioja, a wine that can age particularly well. Producers who make Rioja in its most traditional form take on the responsibility of aging wines themselves before releasing them. This frees consumers of the most serious obstacles to enjoying aged wines: the expense both of investing in wines that will not be consumed for years and of storing those wines under ideal conditions.Why would producers do this themselves? It’s partly a matter of style and tradition. For years, the best Riojas received prolonged aging in barrels of American oak before further aging in bottles. Today, many Rioja producers have abandoned this approach to emphasize other qualities in their wines. But a handful continue to make wines by this traditional method.The labeling of Rioja was likewise organized by how the wines were aged. Wines made for immediate consumption were called joven, or young. Red Riojas that received a modest amount of aging before release — two years’ minimum is the current requirement — were called crianza. Reservas required a minimum of three years of aging, and gran reservas needed at least five years. Many producers of more modern styles of Rioja have abandoned these designations, while the most traditional producers may age their wines far longer than required.Good gran reservas can be sublime, but they can also be hard to find and more expensive than we prefer at Wine School. So we picked a middle ground and chose three Rioja reservas: the 2005 Viña Ardanza from La Rioja Alta, the 2003 Viña Bosconia from R. López de Heredia and the 2009 from Muga.The age variance clearly stands out among these wines. At five years of age, the Muga showed itself as the young’un in the group. Its berry flavors, if not flamboyant, were still brash and somewhat jagged, the tannins still roughly apparent. With a good, fatty leg of lamb, the wine was delicious, though its aromas and flavors remain clearly primary, still redolent of the spicy red fruit that is characteristic of young Rioja. Nonetheless, the wine has the body and richness to evolve further. If it does not yet offer the pleasures of an aged wine, it will with time. Check back in five years, then again in 10.As a producer, Muga sort of splits the difference. It makes traditionally styled wines like this reserva but does not age them as long before release as the most classic producers, like López de Heredia and La Rioja Alta, which made our other two wines. Muga has just released its 2010 reserva, for example, while the ’05 Ardanza and the ’03 Bosconia remain the current releases from our other producers.The Ardanza, at nine years of age, has clearly begun its transition toward an aged wine. The years have buffed its ripe berry and earthy mineral flavors, while the soft vanilla of the American oak serves as a velvety frame, cushioning the wine. The aging shows in the smooth integration of the wine’s various components, yet a sharp tingle of fruit and acidity remains, indicating that it still has quite a few years before it. Gran reservas can age for many decades, but what about reservas? Hard to answer, but I recently drank a 1974 Contino Reserva that was absolutely delicious.The last wine, the ’03 Bosconia, was elegant, sleek and subtle, showing great finesse in its graceful, rich yet burnished flavors. This is a well-resolved, fully revealed wine, further along its trajectory than the Ardanza, more than the two years of age difference would suggest, most likely because of the peculiarities of the very hot 2003 vintage. The Bosconia from 2004, a much better vintage, will arrive soon, and my guess is the wine will last far longer than the ’03.The pleasures of aged Riojas were not lost on readers. “Rioja is probably the only region where you could find top wines selling at this price range,” noted Adrian Wu of Hong Kong, who also lamented the dwindling number of producers who are still doing the work of aging.Ali of New York, who found the ’05 Ardanza, wrote online that the wine was firm at first but became “richer, lovelier, fresher” with time and food. And Seancpa of Pleasant Mount, Pa., who found an Ardanza from 2001, an excellent vintage, found the wine light on the palate, with less immediate fruit flavors than a younger wine but with more depth.“The word that comes to mind about aged Rioja is smooth,” Ali wrote, and I agree. Wines like these are to be treasured. As the taste for wine has become more widespread and democratic, a smaller percentage of its audience can afford to invest in aging wines, so it is a treat to find affordable wines that are pre-aged.This is not to say that aged wines are necessarily better than, fresher, younger wines. Even with wines with the potential to age, some people prefer them young. There is no universal moment when a wine is at its peak. It depends on your own taste. The difficult trick is to build up reference points so you can make up your own mind.An earlier version of this article contained an outdated listing for the importer of Muga Rioja Reserva 2009. It is no longer Tempranillo.Characteristics to ConsiderAgingHow would you describe the effect of aging on the wine, particularly if you compare it with a younger Rioja?TextureWhat does the wine feel like on the palate? Does it differ from other red wines? Or is it difficult to single out any particular characteristics?Aromas and FlavorsMore traditional Riojas do not necessarily display the vibrant aromas and flavors of fruit that we ordinarily associate with red wine. What do you detect?Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.Advertisement