https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/20/dining/daniel-rose-chef-le-coucou.html
Daniel Rose, an American in Paris, Comes Home to Cook - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2042
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeff GordinierAsk Daniel Rose a question, and he’ll respond with a question of his own.“Well,” he said the other day in the gleaming kitchen of Le Coucou, the restaurant he plans to open in May in the 11 Howard hotel in SoHo.“What is a steak frites?” He pondered that. He cocked his head. His gaze drifted off. He looked a little like Dustin Hoffman playing Lenny Bruce trying to tease out a joke in his head.“A little bit of that fresh bloody thing,” he finally said. “I like that.” He mused on crispness — “the water in the lettuce” as a necessary element in a good salad, and frites whose perfection arises from “nothing but potatoes, oil and salt.”“That’s the genius of the French tradition,” he said.As one can tell from his Socratic method, Mr. Rose likes to puzzle out his food. At 38, he’s a bit of a puzzle himself: a student philosopher turned chef, and a Chicago native who climbed to the top of the Parisian food world 10 years ago with a tiny ingredient-obsessed Right Bank restaurant called Spring.The contradictions continue: Now this champion of fastidious French tradition is returning to the United States in a partnership with Stephen Starr, the protean Philadelphia-based restaurateur who has the reputation, fair or not, of being more a blockbuster crowd-pleaser than a mentor to culinary brainiacs.For the debut of Le Coucou, which will be the first time this American in Paris has cooked in an American restaurant, Mr. Rose and his family have rented an apartment in Brooklyn. He’s not sure how he’ll juggle cooking on two continents, but he expects to be dug in at Le Coucou at least through the first cycle of reviews.Eventually, he said wryly, “I’ll get a lot of frequent flier miles, I guess.”In fact, it was the process of inquiry (along with a desire to meet Frenchwomen, one of whom, the chef Marie-Aude Rose, he wound up marrying) that lured him there to begin with.“France was a place — is a place — with a tradition of thinking, and in this case a history of thinking about food,” he said. “It sounds kind of weird, but I’m interested in life.”He arrived in Paris in the late 1990s after plunging into philosophy and Greek literature at St. John’s College in New Mexico, and he got into cooking (after a failed attempt to join the French Foreign Legion) “the way I approach a lot of this stuff, which is to ask a question,” he said. “What is a French restaurant? What is a restaurant? I spend too much time thinking about stuff like that. The antidote to that was the doing.”So what is a cerebral purist like him doing with Mr. Starr, a guy who oversees (at press time) 34 restaurants? The auteur in Mr. Rose finds it appealing, and reassuring, that Le Coucou will be supported by a well-oiled engine of commerce.Mr. Starr, for his part, takes issue with those who characterize him as resolutely middlebrow. “I dispute that,” he said in the kitchen with Mr. Rose. “I was a populist, and I’m a populist now in order to make money and survive.”In Hollywood, summer superhero movies can subsidize the Oscar-worthy character studies. In a similar way, Mr. Starr said, mass-appeal magnets like Buddakan help finance chef-driven labors of love like Upland, the Clocktower, Serpico (in Philadelphia) and now Le Coucou.“I will never make a lot of money here, in this restaurant,” Mr. Starr said. “That’s not the point. My heart is in these types of restaurants, but you’ve got to pay for the things.”When he proposed creating a showcase for Mr. Rose’s cooking in New York, the chef flew in from Paris and installed himself temporarily in the kitchen at Buddakan. For Mr. Starr, he prepared poulet en vessie, a luxe Gallic hat trick in which chicken is cooked inside a ballooned-up pig’s bladder.“I brought a pig’s bladder in my bag,” Mr. Rose recalled.“How did you get that through customs?” Mr. Starr asked.“I didn’t say anything,” Mr. Rose said, deadpan.If that seems a deeply French gesture, Mr. Rose’s response is apt to be “mais oui.” His success in Paris is attributable not only to his skill in the kitchen, but also to his complete immersion in Frenchness.His cooking betrays little interest in giving the classics a 21st-century tuneup; he says he has never cooked a cheeseburger or pasta, outside of meals he may whip up for his two children, ages 2 and 4.If anything, his dishes stand as reverent personal tributes to the tradition that produced them.“His love for French cuisine and French culture made him accepted by the French, by the Parisians,” said his friend Gregory Marchand, the chef behind another popular spot, called Frenchie.Mr. Rose did break from custom in at least one notable way. “Restaurants in France, and particularly in Paris, were never known for their glowing, warm service — though there are certainly standout exceptions,” said the Paris-based journalist Lindsey Tramuta, whose book “The New Paris,” about cultural change in the city, will appear next year.Mr. Rose’s approach to hospitality stood out. “So here comes Daniel with his enthusiasm, natural warmth and a genuine passion for interacting with diners,” Ms. Tramuta said. “In the first version of Spring, he was cooking entirely alone and had close contact to each and every diner, delivering the dishes to the tables in many instances. Dining in his restaurants feels very much what I would imagine it would be like to dine in his home, and that’s extremely rare.”The target of Mr. Rose’s intense attention at Le Coucou (the name, he said, refers to someone who is “sweetly crazy”) will be the same thing that preoccupies him at his two restaurants in Paris: Spring (which opened in the Ninth Arrondissement but later expanded and moved to the First) and La Bourse et La Vie, the Second Arrondissement bistro where he pursues the idée fixe of steak frites and serves a veal pot-au-feu that has achieved legendary status.His obsession? Ingredients. “That moment of tasting veal that really tastes like veal is a very powerful thing,” he said.Nearly all chefs these days rhapsodize about the quality of their carrots, but Mr. Rose is known for applying a fanatical focus to finding the best chicken, the best oyster, the most exquisite onion. “No matter how much it costs,” Mr. Marchand said, “he’s really crazy about the quality of the products.”His madness was on display on a recent Tuesday afternoon as he huddled around the stove with members of his crew at Le Coucou to test the ingredients he had hunted down.“We put it in a hot pan and cook it,” he said. “That’s how we learn about it.” From the sound in the pan, he said, he could divine the quality of certain ingredients — “not that I have X-Men powers or something.”In the oven simmered a rich Alsatian-style stew called a baeckeoffe, layered with sliced potatoes and the melting fat of short ribs, lamb shoulder and pork cheeks.Mr. Rose saw it as a tribute to André Soltner, the great French chef whose restaurant Lutèce dazzled New Yorkers for decades. (Mr. Rose envisions Le Coucou as something of a “Lutèce reboot,” even though he never ate there. “Crazy, right?” he said. “I’m talking about what my idea of Lutèce is.”)But most of his work this day was radically simple. He poached a chicken. He watched as sea bream was sautéed in a pan. He breathed in the scent of oysters.Mr. Rose is particularly serious about chicken. He had at least a dozen varieties to test over the course of a few days. Most disappointed him.He sliced off a knob of meat and nibbled on it. His eyes revealed a man lost in thought. “Same problem,” he said. “Bitter. Is that just my tongue or is that for real? I got that funky bitterness again!”Tim Lu, Le Coucou’s executive sous-chef, tried it, too. “Oh, yeah,” he said.An almost hidden wave of disgust and frustration passed over Mr. Rose’s face. “Now I’m getting kind of grumpy,” he said. “It doesn’t taste very good at all. You know where the best chicken we’ve had was from? Chinatown.”Mr. Rose’s cooking depends on the delicious integrity of these core ingredients; he is averse to frills and adornments that may interfere with one’s communion with the essence of hen or oyster.He needed his kitchen team to understand what he wants. But there was another part of that, too. “They’re already learning to anticipate what it is that I don’t want,” he said.And what did he not want? He didn’t need to think about that answer. “More than it needs,” he said.An earlier version of this article, using information from a publicist, misstated the sexes of Daniel Rose’s two children. They are a boy and a girl, not two girls.cookingcookingAdvertisement