https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/03/dining/thanksgiving-vegetable-recipes.html
Same Vegetables, New Flavors - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
648
AdvertisementSupported byCity KitchenBy David TanisHow traditional do you want your Thanksgiving meal to be? It’s a good question to ask when planning a menu. The original New World Thanksgiving dinner — a several-days-long feast — was lavish, but it is likely that green vegetables were not abundant.Gourds, melons, pumpkins and squashes were the vegetables of choice, or carrots and parsnips grown from seed brought by the settlers. Dried native corn was ground, and either baked into cakes or cooked for porridge. Berries and other wild fruits such as plums, gooseberries and grapes were much appreciated.But mostly there was game to eat, and plenty of it. Wild turkeys and pheasants, ducks, geese and swans were spit-roasted, as was a vast supply of venison. Cod and lobster were plentiful. Shellfish was abundant, too; huge coastal beds were stacked with oysters, clams and mussels, just waiting to be plucked.Over centuries, the Thanksgiving menu has changed. Giant turkeys and hams now dominate the meal, and vegetables have more real estate on the sideboard. In many respects, however, the repertoire has remained the same — somewhat bland and soft. We put forth mashed potatoes, soggy peas, green-bean casserole, creamed onions, marshmallow-topped canned sweet potatoes and bread stuffing. Salads are shunned by many Thanksgiving cooks. (With exceptions, of course.)I get it. Nostalgia makes us, myself included, crave these dull and mellow accompaniments. Even so, I’m usually inclined to tinker just a little. I monkey around with the bird’s seasoning, and, for the vegetables, I want some bright flavors and colors to contrast with the generally monochromatic basics. I always turn my cranberries into spicy chutney, for instance. This year, I’m playing with basic vegetables like carrots, cauliflower and brussels sprouts.A dozen tools reviewed by Wirecutter to improve your Thanksgiving feast.Mashed carrots may bring baby food to mind, or a fancy French purée, but these “smashed” ones are something else, and they have texture. Add the salty tang of feta cheese and lots of chopped fresh mint, and the carrots’ sweetness becomes a playful partner in a new scheme. Throw a little garlic at them, and a hint of crushed red pepper.Cauliflower can be boiled, baked or roasted, and seasoned in any number of ways. Going sweet and sour is a good option for Thanksgiving — I like the contrast of big Italianate agrodolce flavors. Raisins, currants, wine, sugar and vinegar, along with onions and sweet spices, transport cauliflower to elegance. I make this a day or two ahead, as it only improves as it steeps. Served hot or cold, the cauliflower becomes a sort of condiment as well as a side dish.Though they look like tiny cabbages, brussels sprouts don’t have the same demeanor as cabbage. They manage somehow to be both bland and overpowering with their imposing personality. Don’t get me wrong — I’m a fan. Sprouts simply require a more aggressive approach than steaming or even roasting. They pair well with cured pork, like bacon, so I figured why not chorizo? Spanish chorizo has loads of flavor, but, for good measure, I added a little smoky push from pimentón and a hit of chopped garlic, which made the vegetable especially fetching.New traditions must begin somewhere. To please your guests this year, try one of these jazzed-up vegetables. If you prefer to stick with family favorites, save them for another Thanksgiving Day — or any day.Recipes: Smashed Carrots With Feta and Mint | Sweet-and-Sour Cauliflower with Golden Raisins | Brussels Sprouts With ChorizoFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.cookingcookingcookingAdvertisement