https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/30/arts/television/game-of-thrones-bran-interview-isaac-hempstead-wright.html
‘Game of Thrones’: Isaac Hempstead Wright on Bran’s Powers and Ties to the Night King - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1698
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jennifer VineyardBran Stark came home to Winterfell, but spent most of Season 7 of “Game of Thrones” semi-checked out of the intrigues happening around him. Until Sunday night’s season finale, that is, when he finally became lucid enough to drop some serious bombshells. First, he provided the testimony necessary to condemn Littlefinger at his makeshift trial, and then later connected the dots with Sam to realize that Jon Snow is actually the legitimate son of Rhaegar Targaryen and the rightful heir to the Iron Throne.Isaac Hempstead Wright, who has enjoyed watching the memes generated around his character, shared his take on Bran’s psychic abilities, the deleted scene that would have clarified the Sansa-Arya tensions and whether he’ll face off with the Night King come Season 8. The following are edited excerpts from that conversation.[Ahead of the final season of “Game of Thrones,” relive it all with our ultimate watching guide, including episode recaps and deep plot dives.]From what I understand, you actually modeled Bran this season on Dr. Manhattan from “Watchmen.” How did that come about?David [Benioff] and Dan [Weiss], our producers, got me into that. We had a separate meeting before our first table read, and I had already seen most of the scripts and seen that Bran had gone through quite a dramatic change this season. And they brought me the “Watchmen” comic, and said, “Look, the kind of vibe we’re going for is this Dr. Manhattan type. Kind of slightly removed and vacant, but wise and all-knowing.” What they were keen on was to not let the performance become really boring, because when you’ve got that kind of monotonous, very plain delivery, it can end up being just a bit repetitive. So they wanted to get a bit of Bran, but within this new kind of supercomputer vibe. I’ve never actually seen “Watchmen” before, but they told me not to watch the film. I just read the comic. So that was our idea, “Dr. Branhattan.”I also threw a bit of the old Three-Eyed Raven into it, because that is who Bran has become now. The consciousness of the old Three-Eyed Raven has passed on to Bran. But Bran hasn’t lived as long as the old Three-Eyed Raven — he’s not a thousand years old, or lived in a tree — so there is still a slight bit of, not necessarily naïveté, but the fact is, Bran’s not quite the wisest man in the universe just yet. As you’ve seen, he doesn’t know everything yet. He hasn’t been all the way through the history of time.So that raises the question of how much he knows, and when he knows it. Say with the Littlefinger situation, did Bran know everything about that when he first said, “Chaos is a ladder”? Or when he gave Arya the dagger? When did he clue in the Stark siblings? Because that’s a moment that must have happened offscreen, and it affects how we read the Sansa-Arya interactions. How it was phrased to me is basically, Bran has the library of the history of the world at his fingertips. He can look up anything, but he hasn’t yet looked through it all. It’s like everything has been downloaded into his brain, like he’s got a Kindle library of everything, but he hasn’t read all the books yet. He can look up a particular page, but he hasn’t learned the whole thing by heart just yet, as the old Three-Eyed Raven may have.But it occurs to Sansa that Bran basically has a CCTV collection at her disposal, and she thought, “What better way to figure out what Littlefinger’s up to than by asking someone who can definitively find out everything he’s ever said?” So I think before Sansa decided whether it was her sister that was a threat, or it was in fact Littlefinger, she came to Bran and said, “Look, can we look up what Littlefinger’s been up to?” And Bran said, “Yep, this is everything.” And then they were like, “This is the situation.” There was a little scene that we did shoot, which I don’t think made it in there, where Sansa comes to Bran’s door and asks if he can help. I’m sure we’ll see that on the DVD’s deleted scenes.Have you seen all the memes that have generated from emo Bran this season?Many, many memes. There was a great one where Meera comes to Bran, going, “Oh, Bran! But Hodor died for you!” and there’s a little picture showing like on WhatsApp, red, ignored. [Laughs] I’ve seen a lot of people doing screenshots of all the sex scenes, and photoshopping Bran into them, like he’s watching live porn.Because theoretically, he’s able to watch even Jon and Dany. I mean, if he was able to observe Sansa’s wedding-night rape … Oh, god! [Laughs] The thing is, it’s not like Bran is watching this as a teenager, going, “Oh god, this is great.” He’s literally like a supercomputer, analyzing a feed, more like, “Oh, they’ve made a connection,” or whatever. It’s all about information to Bran now. He’s the all-knowing, [laughs] slightly creepy Three-Eyed Raven. I don’t think Bran intended to share that with Sansa in any kind of disturbing way. He just sees Sansa and all these things come up flashing around his face, like, “Oh! This happened, and this happened, and this happened…” He’s just processing everything. I reckon Bran can access anything he sets his mind to. He just needs to be set in the right direction.What do you make of the theories that Bran is actually the Night King?That’s really picked up recently! People are analyzing pictures of my face and going, “It’s him!” Um, I don’t think I look that much like the Night King. I’m not sure. Only a very few of us know what’s going to happen next. I think we can see quite clearly that the Night King and the Three-Eyed Raven have some history. The way the Night King came in and killed Max von Sydow, there was some intense emotions behind that, from what you’d think was an emotionless Night King. So I’m pretty sure the Night King and Bran have some unfinished business, but who knows what that will be!Bran wants Jon to know about his heritage, but perhaps Sam should handle the delivery of that particular bit of information. Should Sam and Bran continue to team up, what else would you like them to share with the realm?I think you’re right. I think it would be better for Sam, who can dress it up slightly more than Bran just going, “You’re the heir to the throne.” That might be a difficult way to find out something so exciting! Sam and Bran, they could basically write the book of “Game of Thrones.” They could write “A Song of Ice and Fire.” I would get John Bradley to start scribing out the entire books that George R.R. Martin has written, because, basically, they now have access to that. It could be very, very meta. It would be like “Game of Thrones” within “Game of Thrones”!Advertisement