https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/02/dining/bouley-restaurant-review.html
Bouley in TriBeCa Still Goes Its Own Way, Seductively - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2055
AdvertisementSupported byRestaurant Review14 PhotosView Slide Show ›By Pete WellsYes, the apples are still there. Hundreds of them, lining shelf after shelf in Bouley’s first room, the small one with the coat closet. Going soft under the skin, ripening, giving up the yeasty cider-mash smell you meet in orchard barns. As far back as 1987, when he opened the original Bouley on the other side of Hudson Street in TriBeCa, David Bouley has wanted that scent inside your head the minute you walked in.Yes, the trick works. Before your mind has time to doubt, your senses are leading you.Yes, the restaurant is trying to seduce you. There’s no other explanation for the gold leaf on the groin-vaulted ceiling or the crushed velour just about everywhere — on the curtains, the banquettes, the frame around a softly radiant field of lavender in an enormous painting. There’s even a velour armchair next to a toilet in the men’s room downstairs. It must be there in case you have brought along an especially devoted valet.Yes, it’s faintly silly. But there’s also visual joy in the baronial curves of the limestone fireplace and the patterns woven into the antique rug. This is a restaurant for romantics and sensualists, just the place to take my friend who collects Victorian jewelry and mounted butterflies, the one who will smile when she sees the Chartreuse prominently shelved with the other after-dinner drinks.No, Bouley is not trendy. Mr. Bouley doesn’t even seem aware that trends exist apart from those shooting through his own mind, of which there are more than anyone can count. Occasionally, these overlap with trends in the world outside. This is the case with his interest in gluten-free bread, as evidenced by two dense loaves that ride around on a wooden chariot with at least a dozen other proprietary breads. Typically, gluten-free bread in restaurants is, like margarine, a barely credible substitute. These two bricks at Bouley, on the other hand, reflect creativity, experimentation, maybe a shade of obsession.Yes, they’re delicious. The black one is a little salty, earthy from buckwheat, crackling with walnuts, reminiscent of the seeded health breads of northern Europe, and wonderful as toast. The white one is a little sweet and speckled green with pistachios, slightly tropical-tasting from the coconut fiber that helps hold it together.Yes, you can eat bread with wheat flour instead: get a slice of the dried cherry or the saffron-walnut loaves, press some cultured Norman butter across it. That would be delicious, too. But these two bricks, their mere existence and their distinctiveness, tell you a lot about what makes Bouley compelling. Mr. Bouley takes paths nobody else is on, and walks farther along them than anybody else would.No, I’m not opposed to refined sugar and heavy cream the way he is. When servers murmur that the desserts use only coconut-palm sugar for its “low glycemic index,” it doesn’t particularly turn me on. I don’t really care that the slouching white slab of powdered snow that appears before dessert won’t give me diabetes, although customers who already have diabetes are no doubt appreciative.No, what I care about is the way it melts on my tongue: so fast the cold barely registers before there’s nothing but a cool trace of skim milk sweetened with white chocolate. It’s an impression, no more than that, like sticking out your tongue in a snowstorm and catching a few flakes.No, neither the bread nor the milk fluff is on the menu. They simply appear, along with other surprises that make the cost of a three-course menu, $125, seem eminently fair. But they illustrate a key facet of Mr. Bouley’s cooking: By ruling out some ingredients for reasons of health or digestion, he forces himself to find new ways to whip up delight and a sense of luxury.True, it’s not all dreamy. Buffalo fillet was served with a nondescript sauce and bland, lumpy gluten-free gnocchi. The “chocolate frivolous” dessert, a mainstay for many years, seemed worn out one night, the warm chocolate cake in the middle of the plate filled with a strangely bitter and oily ooze. A tart of apples and black olives was more provocative than delicious.O.K., meals can last longer than they need to. Servers can forget who ordered what, or present a wine bottle to the wrong person. And I wish more women worked in Bouley’s dining room; the gender imbalance there is old-fashioned in the wrong way.Yes, but it gets much, much better.For sure, the most dramatic dish in New York is the Malibu sea urchin in its spiky shell that looks like a medieval torture device. Inside is a layered composition of almond and soy milk; tofu; soy and vinegar; yuzu jelly and bursting orbs of salmon trout roe; creamy tongues of sea urchin under yuzu sorbet; and an olive-green spoonful of golden osetra caviar. Swooshed around it all is a puckering froth of green apple juice. Each bite is exciting in a different way.Yes, the wild mushrooms in the “forager’s treasure” were so richly flavored they fooled me into thinking they were cooked in butter. With melting lobes of grilled tuna belly, a truffle sauce and a light coconut garlic broth, the dish sent me to some other world in a whoosh.All right, I should have learned, but I was tricked again by the lushness of the “ocean herbal broth” pooled around gorgeously fresh shrimp, scallops, a belon oyster and a bundle of sea cucumber cut into ribbons. No butter in this dish either, just puréed garlic and other aromatics with tomato water and the sweet brine that drips from shucked clams.No, the rabbit salad — juicy loin wrapped in crisped belly with inky poached prunes and foie gras — is nothing like a salad. It is a warm appetizer that would be one of the star main courses in another restaurant.Yes, chicken baked in a sealed pot over hay and alfalfa sounds like punishment. It is not. As fowl cookery goes, it is something close to perfection.Yes, perfection. Bouley can skim within sight of it on the right night with the right people. At other times, it’s clear that the restaurant can’t maintain a single-minded focus on doing absolutely everything right. Eccentricity and consistency don’t always get along, and Bouley is a slightly eccentric restaurant, as Frank Bruni noted the last time it was reviewed in The New York Times, in 2009. He thought it was a three-star restaurant.Yes, so do I.This restaurant has closedThis information was last updated on Nov. 27, 2018Reservations powered by OpenTableemail: petewells@nytimes.com. And follow Pete Wells on Twitter: @pete_wells.Advertisement