https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/13/dining/per-se-stumbles-readers-respond.html
Per Se ‘Stumbles’: Readers Respond - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
609
AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesPete Wells’s review of Per Se dropped the landmark restaurant from a four-star rating to two stars. Reader response ranged from shocked to sad, from angry to delighted. Selections from the comments are below; some have been edited for length. Read the review, and all the comments, here.Wow. This review makes me sad. I had an incredible meal there with the food and service close to perfection. Exiting onto the sidewalks of Columbus Circle, I actually felt a sense of melancholy to re-enter the world with all of its many flaws and shortcomings. Sadly, that was a decade ago, and it seems Per Se is no longer that wonderful oasis, but is mortal, like the rest of us.Gotham Gator, New YorkIn 2006, by a mere stroke of luck, I logged into the restaurant's online reservation system at precisely the right time to secure a table for a party of four. My party and I agreed that this rare indulgence would be worth a few weeks of scrimping and saving in advance. My recollection of the meal was that it was wonderful (and the vegetarian tasting I ordered was no less delicious than the standard tasting menu my companions enjoyed). When our servers overheard us talking about how excited we were to be there, they offered us a tour of the kitchen, whose precision and solemnity were absolutely thrilling to see in action. We were dispatched afterwards not only with a variety of macarons, but also with a little box containing a handful of the chocolates I'd raved about during the dessert course--a nice personal touch. I'm sorry to hear that Per Se seems worse for the wear, but still relish the memories of a wonderful meal shared with good company in a restaurant that excelled on every level.realanastasia, Hunterdon County, N.J.My wife and I used to periodically enjoy the hedonistic and self-indulgent dinners out at Daniel, Le Bernardin, Per Se, Eleven Madison Park and the like while chasing food dreams and celebrating an anniversary. Unfortunately, these restaurants seem to have mindlessly ensconced themselves as a place to eat for the those who can afford to take such fine dining experiences for granted. More so, the restaurants lately seem to take their patrons for granted; the value equation is no longer balanced between diner and restaurant. Les Trois Gros put it best: "Beware of theatre in the kitchen." At best, some of New York's so-called best restaurants put on a good, albeit, show. Me, I just want some honest cooking.Orange Creamsicle, Long IslandWhy 2 stars? From this review, it seems like that is way too high (as the key says two stars is "very good"). The food sounds pretty bad, and the service is nothing to write home about. Despite the reviewer making clear that Per Se is resting on its laurels, he seems to be crediting the Per Se of the past far more than he should in the rating.Jess, New YorkAnd the people of Madaya are eating grass and boiled water. I am not sure just where the line of conspicuous consumption is, but this sure crosses it.EAL, VermontEven though I can afford it, I have come to resent these pretentious restaurants. I find a lot more joy in a Mexican Taco truck eating $1 carne asada Tacos or hole in the wall Indian / Pakistani restaurant with the complex aroma of Haleem and Goat Biryani. These are complex dishes, that requires years of institutional knowledge and practice to perfect. A Biryani is often cooked overnight to make the meet tender and allow the rice to soak in the flavor. Yet, all these deliciousness are available under $20.DipB, San FranciscoI have never found any direct correlation between how much I spent at a restaurant and how much fun I had at the meal.Paul Brown, DenverI've eaten at Per Se twice. The first visit was wonderful (2008). The second was merely adequate (2010-ish). Making the second visit worse was how the staff let the patrons do anything - anything - in the dining room. At one point, some jerk stood up and started singing opera loudly and drunkenly. The staff just let him roll on until he was finished. Then a couple tables - where the guests presumably didn't know each other - decided it would be OK to throw things back and forth. Again, silence from the staff. I get that entitled knuckleheads feel like they can do anything, but there has to be a point when someone says, "Hey, Pavarotti. Sit down. Shut up. Eat the quail and go home." Ugh.David R, BostonThis review sums up my experience at Per Se perfectly. Listless service, uninspired environment. 'Ungenerous' is the best way to describe it. The restaurant is like $1,000 sweat pants. It was, by far, the worst experience I had in a restaurant in NY. This is partially based on expectations and price but it in the end it was unremarkable.Thank you, Mr. Wells!Ryan Wagner, ChilePete, thank you for your review! You have validated our experience at Per Se. We saved and planned for a beautiful anniversary dinner and, like you, found the experience quite disappointing. Lobster overdone, the eggplant salad repulsive and the supplemental charges outrageous. Kudos to the pastry chef...desserts were great. Give me Le Bernardin or any of Daniel's restaurants anytime. We will never return and have shared our pricey and dismal dining experience with many of our friends. We were so surprised to hear their responses...."never again" was a common response.BBLRNThank you. Our experience, exactly. They have been victimizing their guests for quite some time now.Olaf S., San FranciscoThank you for writing this review, Mr. Wells. I believe I am its intended audience: someone passionate about food, who would entertain paying Per Se's prices on the most special of occasions - celebrating turning some age ending in zero, maybe - but cannot afford to do so on anything resembling a regular basis. A reader like me must know that a restaurant this expensive can be counted on to provide a remarkable, memorable experience. After all, if I'm going, I'm going just once. For that reason, this review is a boon.Jake Cunnane, New YorkWell, herein lies the problem: a restaurant that decides to charge unreasonably high prices should expect that a diner will demand an unreasonably perfect experience. This, of course, is impossible. I wonder if the cost of the meal had been half, Per Se would have lost so many stars.mansky, San FranciscoI grew up in a very large family and have no memories of us ever eating in a restaurant - financially, it just wasn't feasible.When I moved to NYC in the 1970s I was exposed to things I never dreamed I would - opera, live theater, fine dining among them. I've never been rich but I would save up and splurge on a memorable meal every now and then - I would take a co-worker to celebrate the completion of a very special project by treating them to dinner at The Quilted Giraffe.I would tell our server that we knew very little about fine food, so we were trusting them to put together a great meal, and we wanted to know how each dish was prepared, which wine they would choose and why. We made it clear we wanted to learn.Three times I did this over a few years; could never do it now. But each time it was not only a wonderful meal, the servers really rose to the occasion, we tasted things we had never tasted before, we asked a lot of questions - we got a glimpse into a world we would never be a part of, but it sure was fun to visit, and they made us feel very welcome.Doesn't sound like Per Se could ever be that kind of restaurant, but if you can afford it, I encourage you to save up, make a reservation at one of those chic places, put on your fancy duds, and let them know that you're there hoping to have the best meal of your life.I still remember those three meals I splurged on fondly. They were worth every penny.Chrislav, New YorkI have to wonder if automatically adding a service charge to the bill doesn't result in this. Unfortunately, Per Se may be a good example of a noble experiment that will ultimately fail, for the simple reason that the diner should give the waitstaff a tip based on, well, service.sweinst254, New YorkI love this article and I agreed with the writer. I didn't like the service at Per Se. We finished our lunch and I was still enjoying my coffee when the server asked if we wanted to see the kitchen. I thought it was a nice gesture so we said yes. But then we were told that we need to take all of our belongings with us (strange). After we took a 10 seconds tour in the kitchen, the sever led us through another door out of the kitchen - it was the exit to the restaurant. I felt defrauded because they made excuses such as "showing you the kitchen" to cover how to actually want to kick you out, even after we each paid $300 for lunch. And I haven't finished the coffee that I paid for!Zoe, San Jose, Calif.Having worked at a top of the line place with a charismatic leader extremely focused on serving customers (not in food service but still I think the same applies), I can't help but read into the staff's perceived apathy. My (admittedly completely conjectured) theory: When you have someone driving you to the point of distraction to be perfect all the time, and spoiled clients who expect it so that the top guy can continue to make his millions, you get jaded. While he's keeping the pressure on, you're acting obsequious and attending to the client's every need, but you grow to secretly despise their petulance. When that charismatic guy takes his foot off the gas, service plummets, because at the end of the day the staff just doesn't care, they've lost all pride in their work as the pressure grinds them to bits. And why should they care? They don't really see the profits.Kevin, New YorkIf you think eating there makes you feel ripped off and unwelcome, try working there. It was the absolute worst employment experience I've ever had in my life. The captains treat new people like garbage, the back waiters are too stressed out to ever smile, and the people who work on your level hate you because they're terrified that you're going to do better than they are. Anyone who has solid confidence and an upbeat attitude is a clear threat and thus highly scrutinized by their peers. Managers are too busy basking in their own glory to really notice what's going on amongst co-workers, and just when you think it might all be worth it someday to move up and make mega-money- they hire a captain from the outside to the dismay of everyone because they need to fill a spot ASAP, and the bleeding back waiters who have been abused for years have to remain at their 60+ hours a week indentured servitude. I was not about to stick around and go through that. The money that new servers make is laughable compared to what Per Se charges for food and wine. And ponder this: service is included, at an hourly rate, for nearly all employees, regardless if a table spends $600 or $12,000 (yes, I saw a table spend $12,000), so who's making 20% of $12,000? It wasn't me, that was for sure.John Smith, New YorkWhat happens now? Can Per Se survive this? Does entire staff get fired? Is the chef’s career ruined? Is the owner expected to publicly respond? Do they close for a month and reopen? Are they going to have to cut prices? Do they call in another ballerina? (Just joking about that last question. Sort of.)rk, NashvilleHey. Don’t knock bong water until you’ve tried it.Ed Bogus, Los AngelesAdvertisement