https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/05/insider/times-printing-plants-delivery.html
See How The Times Gets Printed and Delivered - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2519
The Times is printed at 27 locations and takes a trip — by truck or by plane, sometimes thousands of miles — to get to you. Timing is everything.Employees work toward deadline in The New York Times’s headquarters in New York City.CreditCreditHilary Swift for The New York TimesSupported byBy Katie Van SycklePhotographs by Hilary SwiftTimes Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times.On a Tuesday in late June, a moment in the news cycle was sealed in ink, as it is every night, for the first national edition of The New York Times.If a reporter missed a deadline, or an editor in Manhattan hesitated with a headline, the newspaper might not reach readers — some of them thousands of miles away.The day’s top story was the Supreme Court’s decision to uphold the Trump administration’s travel ban. It was placed on the front page alongside a 4,700-word investigation by Walt Bogdanich and Michael Forsythe into how the management consulting firm McKinsey became embroiled in a South African corruption scandal. “It was just the regular crazy breaking stuff we were expecting,” said Amy Kelsey, deputy director of news design.The Times plant at College Point in Queens, N.Y., produces nearly 41 percent of the daily papers. All other copies are printed at 26 locations around the country. The Times leases a window on the presses for publications like The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, The Dallas Morning News and The Santa Fe New Mexican, and is squeezed in between other print runs.But as regional newspapers close, printing plants are also shutting down. At The Times, this means tighter deadlines and a paper that must travel farther to reach customers. (Daily newspapers for Hawaii, for example, are flown from San Francisco on United Airlines, and the Sunday paper there travels on Hawaiian Airlines from Los Angeles to Honolulu.)So at 9:01 on that night in June, just in time for the first deadline, editors in New York sent the paper electronically from Manhattan to The Courier-Journal’s press in Louisville, Ky., which prints copies for Kentucky, Ohio, West Virginia and Indiana.“You have basically about six hours to get it from the print site to the reader’s driveway, and the U.S. is a very big footprint,” said Robert Barnes, managing director of national production.“If we have production delays, they trickle down to when everything leaves the plant and everything gets distributed, and you get into problems where it doesn’t reach the customer,” Mr. Barnes said.By 9:20 p.m., The Courier-Journal’s press was spitting out copies of The Times. Twenty minutes later, a driver loaded papers into one of four trucks for the beginning of a relay that would fan 5,937 copies of The Times across the Ohio River Valley.The first driver left Louisville at 10:10, right on time. About an hour later, he arrived at a gas station in Erlanger, Ky.There, another truck, and a second driver, was waiting to take the papers 60 miles farther, to The Dayton Daily News.Once in Dayton, at 12:46 a.m., a third driver picked up The Times, along with The Dayton Daily News, and prepared to distribute 110 copies of The Times to subscribers and 40 local retailers. By 1:15 a.m. he arrived at one of his stops, Dorothy Lane Market.“It was a perfect night,” said Mark Weitzel, vice president of circulation operations at The Times.Of course, that’s not always the case. Computer glitches, mechanical issues and even snowstorms frequently derail the paper’s path.But the paper will continue to be available.“Our desire is to serve people who want serious news in whatever way works for them,” said Mark Thompson, The Times’s chief executive, during an interview with CNBC in February.For many readers, that is still a print paper, early in the morning. The first customer at Dorothy Lane Market that day, Alex Tuss, bought his paper at 6:53 a.m. on the way to work.“It is no different than a book, and that relationship of holding it in your hand,” Mr. Tuss said.“Just having it in front of me and just being able to look back up the page, that means something to me in terms of my acquaintanceship with the words,” he said.Nearly two hours later, at 8:38 a.m., David Garrison, 73, stopped at the market to buy the paper with the news of the Supreme Court decision. Mr. Garrison said he liked the sense of control he got from browsing through the printed product — dropping the sections on the floor of his living room.“If you go online you get one story, but if you have the paper you have the whole thing right there,” he said. “It is a map of the world.”Keep up with Times Insider stories on Twitter, via the Reader Center: @ReaderCenter.Advertisement