https://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/07/business/media/c-span2-ratings-soar-during-cruzs-marathon-speech.html
Cruz’s 21-Hour Speech Fueled a Ratings Jump at C-Span2 - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1788
AdvertisementSupported byBy Brian StelterGiven the meager approval ratings the public has consistently given Congress, it might seem surprising that anyone watches the unblinking live shots of the Senate and House on television. But government crises apparently have a way of ratcheting up interest in Washington procedural drama.When Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, started a 21-hour speech on Sept. 24 to protest President Obama’s health care law, the average daily rating for C-Span2, the cable channel devoted to Senate proceedings, increased more than fivefold from the day before, according to data provided to The New York Times by Rentrak. As Mr. Cruz kept talking into the next morning, C-Span2 fans kept watching. In fact, the average rating rose a bit higher on Sept. 25, before returning to more normal levels one day later.C-Span does not receive ratings from the industry standard-bearer, Nielsen, so Capitol Hill press secretaries and callers to “Washington Journal” have had to guess about how many people watch the suite of noncommercial channels. But C-Span, which televises the House, and C-Span2 have a small, dedicated following, according to Rentrak, a Nielsen competitor.Occasionally, the audience balloons, as it did on the days Mr. Cruz spoke, and on Sept. 30, the eve of the government shutdown, when C-Span’s audience more than tripled from the day before. Rentrak data for September showed a similar spike right after Labor Day, owing to C-Span’s telecasts of a widely covered House hearing on the possible use of military force in Syria.Rentrak’s nationwide audience projections are based on anonymous data from set-top boxes in about 12 million homes served by companies like DirecTV, Dish Network and Charter. A 1.0 rating is approximately 1.15 million households, and C-Span’s average daily rating in September was 0.017, meaning 19,550 households were watching at any given time. C-Span2’s average was 0.012, or 13,000 households. Those averages are undeniably low. But Bruce Goerlich, Rentrak’s chief research officer, observed that the ratings “popped up” toward the end of the month as a government shutdown loomed. And since C-Span is a utility of sorts, its real relevance is measured in its cumulative ratings: the number of households that watch at one time or another. In September, nearly 9 million households tuned in to C-Span at least once, according to Rentrak’s projections, and about 5.3 million households tuned into C-Span2.An unknown number of others streamed the channels via the Internet.“We’re pleased to hear it, but it’s news to us,” a C-Span spokesman, Howard Mortman, said when told about the Rentrak ratings. “Noncommercial C-Span doesn’t track numbers. Our operations are funded by cable and satellite affiliates as a public service, and they don’t ask us to report numbers to them.”Advertisement