http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/31/business/dinner-lab-brings-the-wisdom-of-crowds-to-haute-cuisine.html
Dinner Lab Brings the Wisdom of Crowds to Haute Cuisine - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
635
AdvertisementSupported byBy David SegalIt was a late July evening, and Christopher Sorter had just finished cooking an exotic five-course meal that included such triple-dare dishes as beef heart ragù and crème brûlée with bone marrow. When the dinner began, there had been some apprehension about the food among the 120 guests who had gathered in a warehouselike space in Silver Spring, Md. But as waiters cleared the last plates, the event had a relieved and jubilant air, as if everyone had just narrowly dodged a bus.Mr. Sorter is a lean, 28-year-old chef, with a perfectly coifed updo and a pair of black, nickel-sized stretchers in his earlobes, the kind that make you wonder what happens when they come out. He had joined a group of diners sitting at a long communal table, and he asked the five or six who could hear over the din of the music to weigh in on the food. They rhapsodized for a few minutes.“O.K.,” Mr. Sorter asked, “what didn’t you like?”This is an unusual question from anyone making haute cuisine. Typically, the pricier the food, the more likely that it’s prepared by a culinary maestro, and you wouldn’t tell this person that an entree lacks flavor for the same reason that you wouldn’t tell an artist, “That painting needs more blue.”But Mr. Sorter works for Dinner Lab, a pop-up restaurant company that started two years ago and is dedicated to the notion that high-end chefs ought to listen to customers. This is a surprisingly radical idea. Low- and midprice restaurant chains have long market-tested everything from the sesame seeds on a hamburger bun to the cream sauce on a chicken bella. But at the wallet-thinning end of the dining spectrum, you can send your compliments to the chef or you can shut up.Dinner Lab thinks that ethos is idiotic. The company wants to bring the wisdom of crowds to fine dining, and it does so at about 1,500 events a year, in 20 cities. Soon it will try this approach in a more conventional setting: a brick-and-mortar restaurant. The company plans to open at least one, and perhaps as many as three, in locations and with menus determined by the input of thousands of diners.To determine who will do the cooking, Dinner Lab set up a competition that sounds like a reality TV pitch. This summer, it sent nine chefs on a 10-week tour, and through customer feedback it winnowed the field to three. Soon, these finalists will partake in another 10-week tour, and, ultimately — depending on the interest level of investors and the company’s own balance sheet — one, two or all three of the chefs will end up running their own restaurants.The company’s goal is a new paradigm for eating out, one that transforms the meal into an experience, in large part because of the people you meet. High on that list are the chefs, who are encouraged to sidle up to diners for postprandial chats.“I didn’t like the grilled sardines,” a woman in her 30s told Mr. Sorter. “The eyes were still on them.”“I wasn’t crazy about the horseradish whip on the oyster,” her boyfriend said. “Little too strong.”Mr. Sorter nodded politely. This was only the start of the reviews he would hear about the evening. When you attend a Dinner Lab event, you are given an index card and asked to rate each dish’s creativity and taste, as well as each drink pairing, on a scale of one to five. You also decide whether or not the course was “restaurant worthy.”The scores are fed into a computer, and each week the numbers are crunched and the results are relayed to chefs, along with suggestions gleaned from the comments space on the cards and from emails sent in by diners. Maybe some people thought the burnt pepper sambuca sausage with fresh mustard was a little dry. Perhaps the chilled avocado and yogurt soup lacked zing.It is the job of Dinner Lab’s chefs to take this information and to learn from it, tinkering with and improving recipes. And it is the job of Dinner Lab’s chief executive, Brian Bordainick, to find chefs who will tolerate, and maybe even enjoy, this process.“That’s the hardest part for us, in terms of hiring,” Mr. Bordainick said before a Dinner Lab meal in New Orleans. “Chefs can be really abrasive about creativity, the strong ones. So we have to find people who have insanely high levels of technical proficiency, but also, they can’t be jerks. They’ve got to be able to hear, ‘This could be better.’ ”Big Data and Beef TonguePop-up restaurants have been around for more than a decade, but Dinner Lab is the most ambitious attempt to turn the concept into a viable and continuing business. The company runs on a membership model: Pay an annual fee of $100 to $175, depending on the city, and be invited to all the meals served there each week (one a week in smaller markets, like New Orleans; three a week in larger ones, like Chicago, Los Angeles and New York). There’s a charge of $50 to $80 for each meal, drinks and tips included.Adding to the sense that the meal is a performance, every menu gets a title from the chef — Mr. Sorter called his “Vonnegut,” he explained, because both he and the famous author hail from Indiana. The events are held in large, open spaces, like the rooftop of a parking garage, or at a motorcycle dealership — places that turn meals into the food version of guerrilla theater. Mr. Bordainick predicts profitability next year, when, if all goes as planned, Dinner Lab will operate in 40 cities, including international ones.Initially, he and his partners hoped to sell the data gathered at its events to anyone looking to overhaul or create a menu. If big data could help industries like health care and housing, the thinking went, why not restaurants? Owners could acquire original recipes that were surefire hits, rather than waiting for customers and critics to weigh in. And by serving prix fixe menus, Dinner Lab could demonstrate that diners loved certain dishes that they otherwise wouldn’t even try.“We know what people will like before they know they will like it,” Mr. Bordainick said. “Like beef tongue. People don’t find it appealing, from a marketing perspective. But it’s one of the things that people enjoy the most when you put it in front of them.”But when Dinner Lab tried to sell its data trove to a handful of restaurant owners, the pitch went over like beef tongue. Maybe people would have loved it, but nobody wanted to try it. “They basically said, ‘We don’t need you,’ ” Mr. Bordainick said.One of the restaurant companies approached by Dinner Lab was the Union Square Hospitality Group, the Manhattan company, led by Danny Meyer, that operates Gramercy Tavern and a handful of other restaurants with stellar Zagat ratings.“Those are event settings,” said Richard Coraine, Union Square’s senior managing partner of new business development and consulting, talking about Dinner Lab meals. “And those diners are critiquing a product and an experience at a certain place and time. That’s good but it’s not applicable for our business.”Dinner Lab also approached a handful of venture capital firms, selling both the event business and the data marketing business. Again, not a nibble. “I like Brian a lot, and love how organically the community has grown,” wrote Niko Bonatsos of General Catalyst Partners, in an email. “But Dinner Lab today is an events business, 100 percent. Unless they build a monopoly like FIFA and the World Cup, it isn’t a natural fit for the venture capital model that needs to fund billion-dollar exits.”Dinner Lab does have its share of believers, including John B. Elstrott, the chairman of Whole Foods Market, who along with 24 other investors has staked the company with $2.1 million. That money, and additional funds that Mr. Bordainick hopes to raise in coming months, will help open the restaurant, or restaurants, which will be built with Dinner Lab principles in mind: prix fixe menus, communal tables, highly visible chefs.The price per restaurant will range from “the low hundreds of thousands of dollars to a million,” said Bryson Aust, the company’s chief financial officer. Mr. Bordainick called the restaurants “big swings for us” but not bet-the-company ventures.Most of the chefs recruited by Dinner Lab are second-in-command types at high-profile restaurants, people with the skills, but not the opportunity, to run their own kitchens. They typically get a one- or two-night tryout, and if that goes well, they’ll tour a few cities. The best get a contract lasting a few months, and about 20 have been hired as full-time employees.Some chefs have wowed the right diners and moved on to jobs in restaurants; others have found gigs at other private events. But this summer, the focus of nine Dinner Lab chefs was on earning high-enough scores to become one of the three finalists.Diners knew about the competition as well as the unfolding results because the event manager had explained the whole story. Members, in other words, knew that they would have a hand in crowning winners. This helped shape one of the more unusual tropes of every Dinner Lab evening: the chef’s pre-meal speech.It was a moment to describe the fare, but in true “Top Chef” fashion, it was also a chance to win over diners, and perhaps bump up scores, by providing a condensed, sympathy-inducing biography. Common themes included family and life obstacles.“My version of taking out the trash and mowing the lawn was peeling shrimp and fabricating vegetables,” said Kwame Onwuachi, 24, a chef raised in the Bronx, at the outset of a 10-minute soliloquy he delivered to audiences during the tour. “Not really by choice, but by necessity, to keep the lights on.”Later, he continued, he sold candy bars on the subway to raise money to start his own catering company. That led to enrollment in the Culinary Institute of America, and then to jobs at two of Manhattan’s most celebrated restaurants, Per Se and Eleven Madison Park. Hence the title of his meal: “From Candy Bars to Michelin Stars.”Dinner Lab knows that to turn a meal into an experience, you need to turn it into a story — ideally, a stirring, underdog tale starring the chef. Some competitors, though, disliked that script. Mr. Sorter refused to delve into the pathos of his life, although it was a life that did not lack for pathos. He was raised in straitened circumstances, in a trailer park.“The people who run this thing say, ‘Maybe you should play some things up,’ ” Mr. Sorter said. “I’m like, ‘I don’t think so. I wouldn’t want to win a restaurant because my grandma taught me to cook. I don’t want to win because of some life tragedy.’ ”But your grandmother teaching you to cook hardly counts as a life tragedy, does it?“It doesn’t,” he said, “unless she dies, and they all die at some point.”The Wandering FeastsDinner Lab began as an attempt to help fill a dining niche in New Orleans: a restaurant that was open after 11 p.m. and was not a tourist trap. Mr. Bordainick, who turned 29 on Saturday, had moved to the city in 2007 for the Teach for America program. He had little food industry experience, so he started slowly.“I got in touch with a friend who cooked illegally in her dorm room in college, late-night Thai food,” he recalled, sitting on a sofa one afternoon in the Bushwick neighborhood of Brooklyn, where a Dinner Lab event was being prepped in an art gallery.Mr. Bordainick, tall and lanky, usually wears a New Orleans Saints cap, with a pair of headphones wrapped around his neck. He can come across as a hipster Don Quixote, tilting at the windmills of the restaurant industry, though his verdicts about dishes can be both succinct and Delphic. Of a peanut butter and jelly cheesecake served at a recent event, he said simply, “This is very aggressive.”As he spoke in Bushwick, a dozen people were noisily unloading food and tables from a U-Haul and setting up a makeshift kitchen and dining room. He was impervious to the bustle, as if it were a circus he’d seen a thousand times.“I invited 12 friends,” Mr. Bordainick said of that Thai dinner. “And I didn’t charge anyone. I pulled $200 out of my bank account to cover the expenses. All I asked is that everyone spend an hour giving me feedback.”The meal, which happened in July 2011, at a neighbor’s house, was a success. The food was superb, and the atmosphere exceptionally warm. The next year, he had an event for 60 people in a former catering space that had been bought by a friend. “He said, ‘You can use this space for free if you clean it up,’ ” Mr. Bordainick recalled. “None of the equipment had been touched since Hurricane Katrina.”The service wasn’t great, but once again the chef — a business school graduate and friend named Ravi Prakash, who would become the company’s chief technical officer — delivered.“Instead of being in a kitchen,” Mr. Bordainick said, “he was out there interacting with people, telling the story behind the food, which was this Indian street food he was raised on.”As Dinner Lab meals started unfolding with regularity, Mr. Bordainick realized that he was recreating pivotal experiences from his childhood. He was raised in Spring Valley, N.Y., a town with a lot of immigrant families. He spent many evenings at the homes of friends, many of them of Italian, Eastern European or Middle Eastern backgrounds.“I sort of grew up at other people’s tables,” he said. “You’re elbow to elbow, everyone is picking at everything, you get a real sense of community. There was something really special about that.”To reprise that intimacy, Dinner Lab chefs typically cook in the middle of the room, rather than in a walled-off space. “You should be able to tackle the chef at all times,” Mr. Bordainick said. “We wouldn’t want anyone to do that. But we think it’s an important element.”People at these events typically meet strangers, but for whatever reason — perhaps the price — this is not a young singles’ scene. The average member age, according to the company, is 35, and most people come with significant others.The meals are designed to maximize interaction. The process of scribbling scores inevitably leads to discussions. Long tables help, too, as do family-style courses. The quirky environs put crowds in a convivial mood, though avoiding restaurant settings makes disasters inevitable. One night, in an indoor parking garage in New Orleans, Mr. Bordainick recalled, it was so humid and the Thai food so spicy that the company offered to pay for everyone’s dry cleaning. (Only one customer sent a bill.) Other times, Dinner Lab has had to switch locales at the last minute because, say, a water main broke and the place was flooded.“We usually don’t announce where the meal will happen until a day or two before the event,” Mr. Bordainick said. “And it’s not because we’re trying to be the cool kids on the block. It’s because things can change and we’ve learned that lesson the hard way.”Feedback and Fine-TuningA few days before Mr. Sorter’s “Vonnegut” dinner in Silver Spring, Daniel Espinoza stood outside the Getaway Motor Club in Austin, Tex., a sort of high-end man cave with a bar, a stage and space for handful of gleaming vintage cars.Mr. Espinoza, 24, is small and chatty and built like a Thermos. He had just served his final course, a dessert of apple mousse with cinnamon churros. Diners were filing out, offering thank-yous and back slaps and requesting tandem selfies. His meal was Mexican-themed and titled “Anomar,” which is the name of his grandmother, spelled backward.“She is a huge inspiration,” he’d told the audience in his pre-meal speech. (For the record, she is still alive.)Throughout the competition, the company’s chief operating officer, Francisco Robert, would phone each chef a few days after an event and go over scores and diner comments, offering suggestions and tweaks. Mr. Espinoza was informed that a lot of people were describing his salad vinaigrette as “grainy.” Out went the emulsified pumpkin seeds from his salad dressing and up went his scores.Every element of Mr. Onwuachi’s take on a bacon, egg and cheese dish was overhauled, after it scored a 3.5 out of 5 at his second dinner, in Atlanta. “We decided to go with a creamier cheese,” Mr. Robert said. “The bacon was an afterthought, so we went with a thicker cut. And the egg was originally a smoked yolk that was kind of lost in the dish. So we cured the yolk in olive oil.”In Nashville the next week, the renovated bacon, egg and cheese scored a 4.5.Early in the tour, Mr. Espinoza and Mr. Onwuachi were tied in the standings for first place, and they stayed that way until the competition ended, on July 18. (Diner feedback mattered the most, but Dinner Lab also considered how well a chef managed costs and got along with others.) In third place was Aaron Grosskopf, from San Francisco.The coming 10-week tour will include 12-course meals in some cities, and the goal will be road-testing specific restaurant concepts to see which ones will work, and in which city. Mr. Espinoza, for instance, will offer dishes for a restaurant he envisions a “new-age take on Mexican ingredients and flavors,” as he put it, and perhaps a wait staff clad in the face masks that are traditional in professional wrestling south of the border.“But I don’t know how that will work out,” he added.Presumably, he would learn fast. Diners at these dreamed-of restaurants will be encouraged to fill out comment cards, and Dinner Lab is convinced that customers will take the task seriously, because the focus will be on improving the food.What results from all of this surveying and sifting will surely be the most thoroughly fine-tuned menus in the history of quality dining. Thousands of opinions will be reflected in every decision, right down to the acidity level of the beet-cured hamachi.Some opinions, though, will have to be ignored.“One woman told me that my beef dish needed more coconut,” Mr. Onwuachi said as he prepared to cook in Bushwick one afternoon. This would have counted as an insight had there been any coconut in the beef dish. But there wasn’t.“Certain comments like that,” Mr. Onwuachi said, “you just have to write off.”Advertisement