https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/05/learning/lesson-plans/reader-idea-how-the-found-poem-can-inspire-teachers-and-students-alike.html
Reader Idea | How the Found Poem Can Inspire Teachers and Students Alike - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2522
AdvertisementSupported byBy The Learning NetworkTo complement our eighth annual Found Poem Student Contest, we have a thoughtful and detailed Reader Idea from Andrea Avery and Lance Coon, whose students have a long history of submitting some of our favorite entries, including 11 poems last year alone.Do you teach, or learn, with The New York Times? Tell us about it here.________Idea: Using The Learning Network’s annual Found Poetry Contest as a catalyst for learning about poetry — and the art of assembling this type of poem.Teacher: Ms. Avery, a teacher and the author of the coming ““Sonata: A Memoir of Pain and the Piano,” writes, below, about their work after she and Mr. Coon, fellow English teachers at the Phoenix Country Day School in Arizona, compared notes on how they introduce the contest and what activities they each do around it.School: Phoenix Country Day SchoolGrade Levels: 9-12Why we chose it: We really can’t put this any better than Ms. Avery did herself:I wanted to share with you how we use this great opportunity to reinforce close reading, experimentation, peer review, self-review, revision in our English classes — and writing it out was helpful for me. We will be entering the Found Poetry Contest again this year. Our student winners are thrilled and excited to have been recognized by you. Samantha said that this contest allowed her “to feel what it’s like to have someone like and recognize my work” beyond her own local, school, family communities._________What Ms. Avery did and why, in her own wordsI think the first year our students submitted found poems for the contest was 2013, when we were delighted to have three winners and one honorable mention. At that point, I was using it only in my senior elective “Art of Composition”; now my colleague Lance Coon and I are both using the contest in our classes — he does it with the seniors and I do it with the sophomores.First, a caveat: Neither Lance nor I is eager to take credit for our students’ successes. But in the interest of a collegial exchange of ideas with other teachers, we have identified the following items. I also interviewed some of our winning students and have included their input._________Class culture and ongoing preparation for found poetry:Both Lance and I agree that some aspects of our English curriculum over all are quite conducive to the found poetry assignment.Lance points out that our students — especially under his guidance — are adept at close reading of texts and that, throughout the year, he encourages them to “look for a juicy image” in a text or extract a phrase or sentence and explore its figurative potential. I agree.One of the activities I do with sophomores to encourage close reading of prose is to have students choose a passage from the novel we’re reading and do a word inventory. I think this lends itself directly to found poetry — and, in fact, a winning student specifically cited this activity as a help.We divide a piece of paper into six sections we call “drawers” or “cubbies”: common nouns, proper nouns, verbs, adjectives, figurative language and literal language. Then students inventory literally every word from the passage that fits into the “drawer” or “cubby.” This allows them to move past reading the passage for what happens or what it describes to start to see the patterns that are laced into the passage. (For example, lots of color words; verbs that suggest struggle, etc.)This also prepares them to write about the effect of the passage and subtextual elements and helps them get a sense of how many choices writers make to convey not only story or information, but also connotation, mood and tone.Samantha Dady (a 2016 runner-up for “Her Mirror”) said she used this technique once she had located news articles she was interested in, so that she could find common themes or tensions between the articles. Here is her poem, which is based on this article and this one.A second aspect of ongoing class culture that prepares students for found poetry is our use of in-class journals. My students write for the first eight minutes of every class, often on a prompt, though they are always free to write whatever they want. Prompts are often “stolen” pieces of dialogue, or lines from poetry, or just funny words. This activity prepares students to play with language out of context and to imagine new scenarios for nuggets of words._________Introducing and preparing the lesson:After introducing the contest and its specifications, Lance and I both ask students to write found poems that don’t follow the rules of the contest, as these early attempts won’t be submitted.Lance encourages students to look anywhere, including using the classroom as a potential text. He points out that a student once used titles of files on his computer for a found poem! I’ve had students use schoolwide email messages. During this “play” phase of the lesson, we encourage students to consider the idea of the twist or the tension between the found poem and its source (I find that sophomores love this idea).We talk about borrowing words from a text and creating something that disagrees with or contradicts the text. A student complaining about how boring his chemistry book was decided to steal words from it and create a product that was exciting, magical, thrilling. Several students chose words from political candidates’ websites to try to extract text that they could rearrange to express an opponent’s viewpoint. One used words from Microsoft’s website to write an ad for Apple.We also do, per the suggestion from the Learning Network site, blackout poems: One of our winners, Breanna Price (“Black Magic”), said that “looking at other examples of found poetry in class and trying blackout poetry gave me a lot of inspiration for my own found poem.” Here is Breanna’s poem, with links to the articles she used._________Three activity ideas for found poems:A. “Skye’s Stereoscope”During a daily journal session in which I had handed every student a picture torn from a magazine to use as inspiration, one student had the brilliant idea to toggle back and forth between the images on each side of the magazine page, writing one sentence or phrase at a time for each picture and assembling them into a poem made up of lines drawn alternatingly from reverse images.This idea belongs to sophomore Skye Richmond, and I am totally going to try it with another group during the found poem unit, perhaps with some modification. I think of this as the “Skye’s Stereoscope” exercise, because it reminds me of those old stereoscopes, or even View-Masters, in which multiple images merge to form a 3D image.B. “BananaPoems”I have a group of kids who come to my room at lunchtime on Fridays to play board games, and a favorite of ours is Bananagrams. It occurred to me that an activity I plan to do this month to introduce or practice found poems is as follows:— I will place on the work surface many snippets of language — words, phrases, etc., on small pieces of paper — including “and,” “the,” “of,” etc.— Students will be instructed to take a set number of snippets — say, 15 — and begin making a poem.— From there, it follows the rules of Bananagrams (i.e., a person who gets it all to work says “peel” and everyone takes a new snippet to integrate; a player can “dump” a snippet in exchange for three more, etc.).— At the end, we will read and appreciate one another’s poems and/or offer suggestions to one another.C. “Visible Listening”This is an activity that I have done with students in our short story unit, but that I think prepares us well for poetry in general and found poems in particular.We listen to short stories read aloud. To encourage students to listen closely, I provide each with a piece of poster board and many markers. As we listen, students are asked to “make their listening visible” by pulling out words, images, etc., and/or by writing down their reactions.The result is a set of posters that, alone and in aggregate, depict what students were “hearing” — and allow us to trace patterns of imagery or to linger on and discuss phrases or words that students collected. It’s sort of like a low-tech word cloud._________Composing our found poems:Lance and I both allow students to create their poems in class — and, crucially I think, we both make found poems right alongside our students.Lance takes this one brilliant step further. He uses his Smart Board to display his work on his poem. So he’ll paste chunks of text up there and then, as kids are working on their own, he moves his around — so students can look up from their process and watch another poet’s process in action, in real time. I am stealing this idea next year.One of the winners, Olivia Najafi (“Keep”) said that what really resonated with her was the advice to “let the poem write itself, meaning don’t force any type of theme or idea.”We encourage our students to start with articles or topics they’re interested in, of course, and then (per Samantha’s comment) start moving away from what the article is about to what good, borrowable, twistable language is in there._________Workshop, peer review, teacher feedback, revision:Lance uses his Smart Board to great effect here, too — though any regular classroom projector would do. He projects a student’s found poem draft on the screen and then guides the group through a peer review.One of the prompts he might use is “Do the lines follow one another?” He also emphasizes “wringing” out the poem: The group helps the poet cut anything that isn’t earning its place on the page. Students point out words that could go, or lines that seem to retain too much prosiness.I use one-on-one consultations with students that follow what I call a recitation-observation-intention-revision format. When a student brings me her poem, I read it aloud to her, and then I ask, “Anything you noticed as I read that?” Then I continue the conversation by sharing an observation about the poem and asking the student about the intention behind it.With Samantha’s poem, for example, I noticed something going on with the capitalizing of pronouns, but I didn’t understand it. So I asked her to explain her intention, and then I pointed out my confusion, and then she came up with a “solution.” I might also make an observation like, “I see many more words in Stanzas 1 and 2 and very few in Stanza 3 — why did you make that choice?” Some students seek out a friend to help them decide what lines can go (again, the emphasis is on “help me trim things away from this,” not “what can I add?”).I think Lance and I both tread pretty lightly on our students’ poems — we don’t, for example, require them to turn in a draft for feedback before they submit to the contest. We don’t, as a default, mark up our students’ poems. I think this might actually be something that is partly responsible for our high number of student winners: The work is truly theirs, and true to them. The poems aren’t too managed. We try to show them the habits and practices of self- and peer review and give them the space to do it. Or not.I wanted to share with you how we use this great opportunity to reinforce close reading, experimentation, peer-review, self-review, revision in our English classes — and writing it out was helpful for me. We will be entering the Found Poetry Contest again this year. Our student winners are thrilled and excited to have been recognized by you. Samantha said that this contest allowed her “to feel what it’s like to have someone like and recognize my work” beyond her own local, school, family communities.Here is a collection of more of my students’ found poems._________Do you have an idea to share about teaching or learning with The Times? Let us know.Advertisement