https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/21/books/review/lionel-shriver-property.html
Money Can’t Buy Love, but It Can Buy Goods — and in These Stories, Lots of Trouble - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2178
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Stephen MccauleyPROPERTY Stories Between Two Novellas By Lionel Shriver 317 pp. Harper/HarperCollins Publishers. $26.99.It’s hard to imagine anyone accusing Lionel Shriver of being a timid writer. The author of 12 novels (including the international best seller and Orange Prize winner “We Need to Talk About Kevin” and the National Book Award finalist “So Much for That”), Shriver tackles such complicated, zeitgeist-tapping topics as school shootings, the American health care system and anxiety about the national debt. After tackling them, she wrestles them to the ground with a novelist’s appreciation for nuance and a journalist’s grasp of facts and attention to detail.Shriver’s large and provocative body of work is evidence that she’s a writer with an imposing intellect, a wealth of firmly held convictions and a take-no-prisoners confidence in her own abilities. Her insights into her characters are often startling — both for their precision and for her willingness to pursue them, even at the risk of highlighting unsympathetic, sometimes unlikable traits: a husband’s ranking of financial security above love; a wife’s decision to deal with her brother’s weight loss rather than her own troubled marriage; a mother’s ambivalence about motherhood itself.Off the page, Shriver also seems to prioritize telling her truth over courting likability. In 2016, in a speech at an Australian writers festival that addressed accusations of cultural appropriation in her novel “The Mandibles,” she warned about the “supersensitivity” of identity politics and charged that it could amount to censorship. The speech triggered fierce debate and a disavowal by the festival’s organizers. (Shriver’s decision to don a sombrero to drive home her point only added to the controversy.)Shriver’s intellect and talent, her political convictions and her impressive confidence are all on display in “Property: Stories Between Two Novellas,” her assertive, frequently funny and altogether satisfying first collection of shorter fiction. The book’s epigraph from E. M. Forster poses an overarching question: “What is the effect of property upon the character?” Shriver sinks her teeth into this query in the novellas that anchor both ends of the book and the 10 stories that shore up the middle. A woman buys a repossessed house from the bank only to have her life upended by ghosts from the evicted owner’s past. A man’s relationship with his father is forever altered by a squabble over £160 and the price of an airmail stamp. A mother’s desire for an empty nest leads her to bounce her unmotivated 32-year-old son onto the street, making him a spokesman for the disenfranchised. A tube of ChapStick resolves a man’s indecisiveness about seeing his difficult, dying father for the last time.In “The Standing Chandelier,” the emotionally sophisticated, irony-laced novella that opens the collection, a decades-long, mostly platonic friendship between a woman named Jillian and a man named Weston ends when he gets engaged and agrees to his fiancée’s demand that he stop seeing Jillian. The friendship, he realizes, is more important to him than he has cared to admit: “The more sizable a sacrifice his fiancée appeared to be demanding, the more amply it was demonstrated that she was right to demand it.”The friends part amiably enough, but any lingering good feelings are reduced to rubble by an argument over an eccentric piece of art that both households consider their own. “The ties between the two parties had been severed. All that remained was stuff.” Thus Jillian concludes that “she had nothing to lose by savaging his good opinion of her, and one thing to gain: her chandelier.” Suspense — here and elsewhere in the collection — depends not on who gets the guy (or girl) but who gets the “stuff.”Shriver’s settings range from Brooklyn to Belfast to London, from Lexington, Va., to Somerville, Mass. She is equally adept at inhabiting male and female characters, and equally convincing with natives of the United States and Britain. (Not surprising, since she divides her time between Brooklyn and London.) While employment — a subject usually touched on lightly in short stories — plays a significant role throughout, Shriver favors characters who live on the fringes of traditional careers: an artist who eschews galleries and survives on pieced-together odd jobs, who approaches “earning her keep like quilting”; an expat American freelance journalist who writes a chatty, low-paying column called “Yankee Doodles”; an international couch-surfer who secures hospitality through the diligent deployment of “brightness and enthusiasm.” The most ambitious character is a corporate embezzler driven to despair by the luxuries he can suddenly afford with his ill-gotten wealth.Despite this variety, “Property” feels more unified than many story collections, and reading it has many of the satisfactions of reading a novel. This is largely due to Shriver’s commitment to exploring her theme. From one story to the next, the acquisition of things — land, money, empty nests — rarely leads to happiness and often stimulates character traits that might better be kept in check. As the disillusioned narrator of “Vermin” observes after she and her husband have come to regret buying a house they’d loved renting, “There may be such a thing as becoming too responsible.”Readers who prefer stories in the minimalist mode with tersely evoked characters and murky endings should probably look elsewhere. Shriver favors a dense patina of detail. Her descriptions of rooms, wardrobes and appearances are full-bodied. Her use of the Irish Good Friday Agreement of 1998 as a plot point had me rushing to Wikipedia.Shriver doesn’t leave readers guessing about her characters’ foibles. “The Subletter,” the terrific, politically charged novella that closes the collection, begins with two pages of exposition on the protagonist’s weakness: “The trouble wasn’t that she was incapable of generosity, but that if she was generous then she remembered being generous … and remembered generosity didn’t seem truly generous, quite.” “The Standing Chandelier” opens with five pages (delightful, sometimes hilarious pages, it should be noted) of the protagonist’s feelings about being disliked: “On top of someone hating you, you cared that someone hated you and apparently you shouldn’t. Caring made you even more hateable.” Several stories conclude with a summary of what the future holds for the characters, in some cases death.If few of the people in these stories are best-friend material (“Jillian had the kind of charm that wore off”), Shriver’s humor and epigrammatic wit render most of them interesting: “A widow of 57 had both too much story left, and not enough. It was narratively awkward: an ellipsis of perhaps 30 years during which nothing big would happen.” “Emer was a taker. Everywhere she went she would siphon off a little more than she gave back. The Emers of this world were levied on the whole species, like a tax.”There are a few stories in this ample collection that seem inessential, and Shriver’s fondness for abundance leaves a couple feeling a bit overstuffed. But her confident grasp of the material and her natural gifts as a storyteller will keep you in her spell and leave you, at the end, slightly altered. “I don’t know if the moral of this story is that you should never buy a house,” one narrator says. I don’t know if that’s quite the moral of “Property” either, but such is Shriver’s power that I finished this persuasive and richly entertaining book wondering if I might not be better off selling mine.Stephen McCauley’s seventh novel, “My Ex-Life,” has just been published.OpinionLionel ShriverAdvertisement