http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/23/us/arizona-fraternity-party-stirs-concerns-of-racism.html
Arizona Fraternity Party Stirs Concerns of Racism - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2008
AdvertisementSupported byBy Fernanda SantosTEMPE, Ariz. — Arizona State University is investigating accusations that members of a fraternity gave a party to commemorate Martin Luther King’s Birthday at which nonblack students mocked blacks by donning loose basketball jerseys, flashing gang signs and drinking from hollowed-out watermelons.Under hashtags like #MLKblackout and #hood, the party’s guests appear to have posted pictures of themselves on Instagram and other social media sites. The images prompted calls for sanctions from civil rights leaders and fueled a mix of outrage, derision and disbelief among other students.“Some people are like that, prejudiced, but I choose to let it go and move on,” Kevin Edward, 19, a black sophomore from a neighboring suburb who is studying computer information systems, said as he rode his skateboard past the university’s football stadium on Wednesday on his way to class. “They’re looking for attention. I just ignore them.” University officials have suspended the operations of the fraternity, Tau Kappa Epsilon. The chapter has been on probation since last fall, when some of its members were linked to the beating of a black student on campus. Amid calls for closing the chapter and expelling the students involved, James Rund, senior vice president for educational outreach and student services at Arizona State, said Wednesday that the school was still “gathering details from those who were involved to find out what happened, what made it rise to the level that it did, their intentions.”Dr. Rund added, “We’re disappointed at the nature of this behavior, but, as extraordinarily offensive and outrageous as it was, we want to spend time affording the students their due process.”Arizona was one of the last states to establish the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday; its governor, Jan Brewer, was among the legislators who voted against creating it when she was a state senator. In 1986, Bruce Babbitt, a Democrat who was the governor at the time, established it by executive order just before he left office, only to have his Republican successor, Evan Mecham, rescind it. The decision was left to voters, who approved the holiday’s creation in 1992.“We have this complicated history, so if we don’t stop every attempt at diminishing this day, we run a serious risk of turning the racist actions of certain individuals into institutional racism,” the Rev. Jarrett Maupin, a black Baptist minister and a civil rights activist, said Wednesday.The party, held off-campus on Sunday, had not been registered, a requirement for all on-campus parties organized by fraternities or sororities, Dr. Rund said. No one answered the door at the apartment listed as the chapter’s headquarters, and the chapter’s adviser could not be reached for comment. One student, Samantha Muñoz, who is of Mexican and Italian descent and lives next door to some of the chapter’s leaders, said, “I understand why people are upset, but the question I ask myself is whether these same people find it racist when someone throws a white-trash party on Fourth of July.” Based in Indianapolis, the fraternity — whose members have included senators, congressmen, judges and a former president, Ronald Reagan — issued a statement this week, saying it does not “condone or support any actions by its members that would be defined as racist, discriminatory and/or offensive.” It characterized the party as an embarrassing and regrettable action of a few individuals, whose decisions “do not align with the values and principles of Tau Kappa Epsilon.”Through a spokesman, it declined to comment further on Wednesday.In an open letter to Tau Kappa Epsilon, posted online, Ja’han Jones, president of the African American Men of Arizona State University, an affinity group that runs a college-readiness program for high school students, wrote, “I am concerned that your fraternal structure is transforming into an echo chamber for racism.” Arizona State, one of the nation’s largest state schools, enrolls about 77,000 students. According to the College Board, 60 percent of them are white and 5 percent are black, mirroring their proportion in the state’s population. Latinos are 19 percent of the university’s students and 30 percent of the state’s residents.A spokeswoman, Julie Newberg, said the school had increased its enrollment of racial and ethnic minorities to 32 percent in 2012 from about 21 percent in 2002. It has also established various diversity work groups over the years, including a minority advisory committee that includes the Rev. Oscar Tillman, president of the Maricopa County branch of the N.A.A.C.P. “What happened, we don’t want to make it into something done to harm the black community, but make it into what it was, which is an act of disrespect to an American hero,” Mr. Tillman said Wednesday.For that, he said, “I hope there are consequences, but I also hope there is a lesson for the young people involved.”Advertisement