https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/30/dining/khao-nom-review-thai-desserts-queens.html
Around the Corner, Thai Desserts Await - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1986
AdvertisementSupported byHungry City8 PhotosView Slide Show ›By Ligaya MishanThe limeade is purple at Khao Nom, a Thai cafe in Elmhurst, Queens. The color comes from dok anchan, or butterfly pea flower, the blossom of a climbing vine native to Thailand, that in nature achieves an imperial blue.The chef, Sopon Kosalanan, known as Tor, boils the petals with sugar until the water looks like bled ink, then adds a squeeze of lime so it mellows into liquid orchid. It’s hard to tell if the faint woody undertone of the flower is a scent or a flavor, but it refreshes, with a controlled sweetness.Three years ago, Mr. Kosalanan took over an aquarium-supply store a few blocks from Wat Buddha Thai Thavorn Vanaram, the Buddhist temple that serves Elmhurst’s immigrant Thai population. He turned the space into Khao Kang, a steam-table rice-and-curry shop with weathered wood tables and a design that bridged rustic and industrial.His potent dishes, uncompromising in sourness and heat, make it a worthy destination alongside its neighbors — including, across the street, the simian-themed Thai bar Pata Paplean, known for tom yum cocktails; the pink-walled Tea Cup Cafe, which slings pork intestine soup alongside red velvet cake and macarons; and, down the block, Ayada, one of the city’s best Thai restaurants.But Mr. Kosalanan, who grew up in Chanthaburi in eastern Thailand, wanted to focus on desserts. He could offer only a few at Khao Kang; now, at Khao Nom, which he opened in October behind Khao Kang — in a storefront that once housed a church, then a foot therapist’s office — he has room for a more expansive lineup that changes almost daily.The pastry case might be stocked with pie-like wedges of taro mashed and whipped like potatoes and transformed into a confoundingly light custard. Tiny pastel rice-flour cakes suggest coins in a fairy kingdom, dimpled at the center and haunted by jasmine. Steamed puddings of coconut cream, with no meddling but salt, rest atop delicate translucent bases of rice flour, palm sugar, coconut milk and pandan — a flavor so difficult to pin down, I can offer little more than to say that it always makes me picture bamboo slicked with rain.A coconut custard reveals a buried treasure of corn and tapioca pearls. Shortbread, a borrowing from the West, is utterly estranged from its origins by a fragrance that infiltrates and possesses the dough: Mr. Kosalanan smokes the flour first, over a scented candle. Luk chup are a sly improvement on marzipan, made of mung-bean paste, with a subdued mustiness and notable restraint in sugar; pieces are sculpted into cherry tomatoes, miniature peaches and alarmingly realistic chile peppers, Corvette-red with a high gloss.These are desserts that favor surprise and evanescence over sweetness. Sometimes they’re not even as sweet as the savory dishes that make up the brief menu. Sugar seems to have found its way into turmeric-stained crepes, fried into a crispy sleeve for ground chicken, shrimp and tofu interlaced with shredded coconut and pickled radish; a half-pancake, half-omelet with briny pops of mussels, slapped over a hash of bean sprouts; and bronzed nubbly corn fritters with whole kernels caught in a mesh of batter.Occasional streaks of heat, as in maeng pla, flaked mackerel strewn with roasted peanuts and tucked into lettuce, are a relief. But these are snacks, after all, not meant to be eaten en masse or to compose a meal. I would have been happy with just curry puffs, neatly pleated and radiating warmth, and rice noodle rolls, akin to Chinese cheung fun: floppy, chewy bands of rice-flour dough loosely wrapped around a nicely salty filling of chicken, tofu and shiitakes. The accompanying soy sauce pitches sweet against sour, dark and viscous, pulling at the spoon like honey.Or better yet: Start with a meal at Khao Kang, turn the corner and end with dessert here. Khao Nom is a lovely place to idle, under high ceilings with teardrop-shaped glass terrariums dangling from exposed pipes, at tables engineered from vintage sewing machines, with a cast-iron lacework of legs and foot pedals. There’s a pay telephone by the front door, perfectly restored, perfectly unusable.Mr. Kosalanan flits back and forth between restaurants through a connected basement. His mother and his aunt hold the fort at Khao Kang, while his sisters-in-law take orders at Khao Nom. They are boundless in patience. There are so many sweets, all requiring names and translations, and they gently give you every one.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.This information was last updated on Nov. 17, 2018Advertisement