https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/10/realestate/1-1-million-homes-in-california-florida-and-new-york.html
$1.1 Million Homes in California, Florida and New York - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
534
AdvertisementSupported byWhat you GetA midcentury-modernist house in Los Angeles, a cottage on a lagoon in Sarasota and a six-family retreat in the Hudson Valley.By Julie Lasky24 PhotosView Slide Show ›Charles Wong, an architect who trained at the University of Southern California, designed this Japanese-inflected glass-and-timber home for a Los Angeles dentist named George Yuen and his wife. It sits on a bluff overlooking the Rueben Ingold Parkway, a recreational area in the View Park neighborhood about 10 miles southwest of downtown. Fun fact: It was the childhood home of Issa Rae, the co-creator and star of the HBO series “Insecure.”Size: 3,593 square feetPrice per square foot: $306Indoors: An external staircase rises from the ground to the front door on the main level. The door opens to a flowing great room where posts support a tongue-and-groove ceiling and where dry rock-faced garden beds are sunk into the oak-plank floor. A storage cabinet with a wall of shoji screens separates the living room from the dining area. At the other end of the living room is a fireplace with a wide marble hearth and a sculptured steel mantel.Past the dining area is an open kitchen with custom cabinets, quartz countertops and narrow chocolate-brown backsplash tiles. A raised breakfast bar is on one side of the kitchen, and a second built-in breakfast table wraps around a corner of the opposite wall, continuing into the den.The master bedroom has three exposures, with doors opening to a wraparound deck and outdoor patio; on the other side of the patio is an office with glass walls. The en suite master bathroom has a wood-grain Formica vanity with a travertine top and double sinks, and a tiled bathing room with a shower and a sunken Roman tub. A sliding door at the end opens to a private garden. A second bedroom has an en suite bathroom with Tuscan-style tile, a glass walk-in shower and a tub with jets. There is also a third bedroom.The lower level has a garage and a laundry room with a dumbwaiter that rises to the kitchen.Outdoor space: Sliding doors open from almost every room to the wraparound deck. The lot is a quarter of an acre.Taxes: $11,150 (2018)Contact: Matthew Berkley or Scott Lander, Deasy Penner Podley, 626-665-3699; 4476mountvernon.comThis house sits at the edge of a lagoon, on an island (Palm) inside an island (Siesta Key). It is less than half a mile from an ocean beach and a mile, along pleasantly walkable back roads, to a business district with bars, restaurants, a market and a dance club. Downtown Sarasota is about a 15-minute drive.Size: 3,146 square feetPrice per square foot: $334Indoors: Built as a small cottage, the property was expanded in the 1980s. It still has the cypress-sheathed living room with tile floors and a rough stone fireplace. The original doorbell remains at the entrance of the kitchen, which was last remodeled in 2014. The dining room and adjacent cypress-paneled playroom are also part of the early structure, as a guest suite opening to the screened patio in back (the bathroom is used as the pool bath).The addition includes a 340-square-foot family room leading out to the pool area and connecting to a 700-square-foot master suite with a new bathroom and walk-in closet. This section also contains two guest rooms and a bathroom with a laundry chute that passes through the wall into the neighboring laundry room.Outdoor space: The cage enclosing the pool helps keep out mosquitoes and debris as well as providing safety. The half-acre property includes 180 feet of lagoon frontage and a playground set. Parking is in a detached two-car garage with a workshop and bike storage space.Taxes: $6,549 (2018)Contact: Christina Pitchford, Suncoast Homes & Dreams, 941-350-4411; 311islandcircle.comBuilt by Fritz Sultzer, an architect in I.M. Pei’s office, as his own rural retreat, this farmhouse-style property known as Shaker House was turned into a lodging in 2011 to accommodate six families in distinctive rooms. It is 90 miles from Manhattan, just west of the Taconic Parkway and about half an hour from the city of Hudson to the north and the town of Rhinebeck to the south.Size: 6,348 square feetPrice per square foot: $172Indoors: The ground floor centers on a tiled great room with a wide brick fireplace wall surrounded by living, media and dining areas. The open kitchen has pine cabinets, soapstone countertops and multiple sinks and ovens. Off the great room is a space with a wet bar built from wood and rough-hewed stone; French doors lead out to the pool area.The bedroom in the ground-floor Quarry Suite steps up to a bathroom with decorative tile, a white marble sink with a copper faucet and an exposed wall of granite that water flows over, like a waterfall. The next level up contains the master suite, whose bathroom has slate tile, a stone-faced shower and brushed-nickel hardware. Also on this level are the Petite Boudoir, a bedroom with a cedar closet next to a bathroom with a claw-foot soaking tub, and the Nursery, a bright bedroom with an adjacent crib room. There is also a cherry-paneled library.The third level includes the Aviary, a bright room with steps rising to a platform under a skylight, where a bed could be positioned for sky- and stargazing, and a long playroom lined with cubbies.The shingled guest cottage, known as the Smoke Shack, was built in the 1970s as the original house on the property. It has a vaulted birch ceiling, kitchenette, bathroom and sleeping loft.Outdoor space: A two-level saltwater swimming pool with lights, a sound system and a pair of waterfalls was added as part of the 2011 renovation. Tiered patios surround it (and, in one case, is submerged within it). The 24.6-acre wooded property also includes a 10-person hot tub and an equipment shed.Taxes: $12,825Contact: Pamela Belfor, Gary DiMauro Real Estate, 917-734-7142; garydimauro.comFor weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.Advertisement