https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/25/us/politics/beto-jennifer-malley-dillon.html
Beto O’Rourke Hires Former Obama Aide as Campaign Manager - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
811
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan MartinBeto O’Rourke has hired a former top aide to Barack Obama to be his campaign manager, installing a seasoned political strategist to take the helm of what has so far been a skeletal organization effectively overseen by Mr. O’Rourke himself.Jennifer O’Malley Dillon, a data expert who was Mr. Obama’s deputy campaign manager in 2012, said in an interview Monday that she was going to work for the 46-year-old former Texas congressman because he represents “a new generation of leadership I think we need.”Ms. O’Malley Dillon was one of the most sought-after Democratic operatives of this election, and her hiring suggests that Mr. O’Rourke is willing to professionalize his presidential bid in a way he resisted during his electrifying but unsuccessful Senate campaign last year.A former executive director of the Democratic National Committee, Ms. O’Malley Dillon, 42, has worked on five presidential races and a number of other campaigns.“We’re excited that Jen O’Malley Dillon has joined our team,” said Mr. O’Rourke. “Her leadership, experience and creativity will be a great addition to a campaign that is already doing so much to bring people together to overcome the greatest set of challenges this country has ever faced.”Since announcing his candidacy earlier this month, Mr. O’Rourke has drawn large crowds on his first forays into the early nominating states. But his improvisational style has also led to some missteps.Ms. O’Malley Dillon said her hope was to scale up Mr. O’Rourke’s operation to meet the demands of a presidential primary while also remaining true to the do-it-yourself instincts of a candidate who enjoys driving himself to campaign events.“We have to build something that really is special and unique to him,” she said.[Sign up for our politics newsletter and join our conversation about the 2020 campaign.]Mr. O’Rourke entered the race without a campaign manager, having had his first extensive conversation with Ms. O’Malley Dillon at the South by Southwest conference in Austin, the weekend before he announced his candidacy.She is taking a leave from her Washington-based consulting firm, Precision Strategies, and will help on Mr. O’Rourke’s formal campaign launch this weekend in El Paso, where Mr. O’Rourke’s campaign is being based, before settling there in May.Ms. O’Malley Dillon, who had been working on a voter data project for the Democratic National Committee and consulting for the Liberal Party in Canada, said she had not planned to get involved this early in the 2020 race but said she was moved by Mr. O’Rourke’s message.“His leadership, his energy, his belief that you don’t have to segment voters and that you can be a president for all voters,” she said, assigning to Mr. O’Rourke attributes that many Democrats once associated with Mr. Obama. “People are searching for that.”As for whether Mr. O’Rourke would bring in a pollster for his presidential campaign — after boasting about his refusal to hire one in his Senate race — Ms. O’Malley Dillon said she wanted to build an operation that’s “authentic to Beto and also efficient and allows us the most direct engagement with voters.”That will, she said, “require a broad team.”Advertisement