https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/27/us/politics/trump-cohen-history.html
Trump vs. Cohen: The Breakup of a New York Relationship - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2820
AdvertisementSupported byBy Mark Mazzetti and Maggie HabermanWASHINGTON — He has spent months inside his Park Avenue apartment glued to cable news, his legal bills growing and federal prosecutors amassing evidence against him they would use as leverage.He watched his onetime friend and former boss, now the president of the United States, smear him on Twitter and make vague, public threats about his family.His work for Donald J. Trump, and the lies he told about it, are sending him to prison for years.On Tuesday, his law license was revoked.On Wednesday, Michael D. Cohen exacted his revenge.It was a nasty, public breakup of a New York relationship forged over a decade that was a mix of the bond between a father and son, the professional distance of a lawyer and client, and — as Mr. Cohen and associates have described it — the blind devotion of a henchman to a crime boss.transcriptHosted by Michael Barbaro, produced by Rachel Quester, Alexandra Leigh Young and Theo Balcomb, and edited by Lisa TobinIn an extraordinary public hearing, Donald Trump’s former fixer — once known for being unflinchingly loyal — became the star witness against him.michael barbaroFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today: Michael Cohen is headed to prison for lying on behalf of Donald Trump. Yesterday, he told Congress he’s done protecting the president. It’s Thursday, February 28. Maggie Haberman, how does this hearing actually begin on Wednesday morning?maggie habermanThe hearing began in very dramatic fashion with Elijah Cummings, who chairs the committee, a Democrat, holding the gavel. Michael Cohen walking in through this crush of photographers and reporters, trailed by Lanny Davis, his attorney and sometimes spokesman, trailed by another of his attorneys, not by any member of his family, who I believe he was worried about attending this hearing. He sat down. His face was wan. His eyes were puffy. He looked exhausted, and defeated, and beaten down. And you could hear a pin drop as he sat down.archived recording (elijah cummings)The committee will come to order.maggie habermanSo Cummings out of the gate —archived recording (elijah cummings)I now recognize myself for five minutes to give an opening statement.maggie haberman— addressed the issue of Michael Cohen’s credibility.archived recording (elijah cummings)He admitted to lying about his actions to protect the president. Some will certainly ask, if Mr. Cohen was lying then, why should we believe him now?archived recordingGood question.archived recording (elijah cummings)This is a legitimate question.maggie habermanIt was very clear that Republicans were going to go right at Cohen, accusing him of being a liar, somebody who has admitted to lying, including admitting to lying to Congress when he gave testimony before them in 2017. So Cummings was hoping to put that to bed at the outset.archived recording (elijah cummings)This is an important factor we need to weigh. But we must weigh it, and we must hear from him.michael barbaroAnd Maggie, I found it fascinating what Cummings did at the close of this opening statement. He delivers this message straight to Cohen.archived recording (elijah cummings)Martin Luther King, Mr. Cohen, said some words that I leave with you today before you testify. He said, faith is taking the first step, even when you can’t see the whole staircase. There comes a time when silence becomes betrayal. Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that truly matter. In the end, he says, we will remember not the words of our enemies, but the silence of our friends.maggie habermanAnd with that quote, he’s trying to set up Michael Cohen’s testimony — why he’s being truthful, that what he said before is a lie, and what he is saying now is the truth. And this was important for him to set this out as a way forward as the hearing began.archived recording (elijah cummings)Raise your right hand. Do you swear or affirm that the testimony that you are about to give is the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Let the record show that the witness answered in the affirmative. And thank you, and you may be seated.maggie habermanSo then Michael Cohen begins his opening statement. And it was long.archived recording (michael cohen)I hope my appearance here today, my guilty plea and my work with law enforcement agencies are steps along a path of redemption that will restore faith in me and help this country understand our president better.maggie habermanAnd he began again by apologizing for lying to Congress.archived recording (michael cohen)I am here under oath to correct the record, to answer the committee’s questions truthfully and to offer the American people what I know about President Trump.maggie habermanAnd then he turned to Donald Trump.archived recording (michael cohen)I am ashamed that I chose to take part in concealing Mr. Trump’s illicit acts rather than listening to my own conscience. I am ashamed because I know what Mr. Trump is.maggie habermanAnd he depicted Donald Trump as a unsavory, unethical, immoral character.archived recording (michael cohen)Mr. Trump is a racist. The country has seen Mr. Trump court white supremacists and bigots. You have heard him call poorer countries [expletive]. In private, he is even worse. He once asked me if I can name a country run by a black person that wasn’t a [expletive]. This was when Barack Obama was president of the United States. And while we were once driving through a struggling neighborhood in Chicago, he commented that only black people could live that way. And he told me that black people would never vote for him because they were too stupid.maggie habermanSomebody who told him from the Oval Office, in an Oval Office meeting, that he would be sending him a reimbursement for hush money payments.archived recording (michael cohen)Trump is a con man. He asked me to pay off an adult film star with whom he had an affair and to lie about it to his wife, which I did. And lying to the first lady is one of my biggest regrets.maggie habermanHe portrayed Donald Trump as a cheat.archived recording (michael cohen)And it should come as no surprise that one of my more common responsibilities was that Mr. Trump directed me to call business owners, many of whom are small businesses, that were owed money for their services, and told them that no payment or a reduced payment would be coming. When I told Mr. Trump of my success, he actually reveled in it.maggie habermanAs a schemer, who would inflate his net worth or devalue it, depending on what was useful for him at various points.archived recording (michael cohen)It was my experience that Mr. Trump inflated his total assets when it served his purposes, such as trying to be listed amongst the wealthiest people in Forbes, and deflated his assets to reduce his real estate taxes.maggie habermanAt one point, Michael Cohen told a very detailed story of Donald Trump’s relationship to the Vietnam War. Remember that Donald Trump has said that he had a deferment from the draft because he had, quote, unquote, bone spurs.archived recording (michael cohen)But when I asked for medical records, he gave me none, and said that there was no surgery. He told me not to answer the specific questions by reporters, but rather, offer simply the fact that he received a medical deferment. He finished the conversation with the following comment: “Do you think I’m stupid? I’m not going to Vietnam.”maggie habermanAnd at that moment, Michael Cohen looked directly into the camera.archived recording (michael cohen)And I find it ironic, Mr. President, that you are in Vietnam right now.michael barbaroRight.maggie habermanIt was damning stuff.archived recording (michael cohen)A lot of people have asked me about whether Mr. Trump knew about the release of the hacked documents, the Democratic National Committee emails, ahead of time. And the answer is yes. In July of 2016, days before the Democratic Convention, I was in Mr. Trump’s office when his secretary announced that Roger Stone was on the phone. Mr. Trump put Mr. Stone on the speakerphone. Mr. Stone told Mr. Trump that he had just gotten off the phone with Julian Assange, and that Mr. Assange told Mr. Stone that within a couple of days there would be a massive dump of emails that would damage Hillary Clinton’s campaign. Mr. Trump responded by stating to the effect, wouldn’t that be great.michael barbaroAnd then he brings up, of course, the now-infamous Moscow project.maggie habermanRight.archived recording (michael cohen)I lied to Congress when Mr. Trump stopped negotiating the Moscow tower project in Russia. I stated that we stopped negotiating in January of 2016. That was false. Our negotiations continued for months later during the campaign.maggie habermanHe says that there were, you know, a handful of these conversations that went on into 2016, when it was clear that Donald Trump was going to be the Republican nominee.archived recording (michael cohen)Mr. Trump did not directly tell me to lie to Congress. That’s not how he operates. In conversations we had during the campaign, at the same time I was actively negotiating in Russia for him, he would look me in the eye and tell me, “There’s no Russian business,” and then go on to lie to the American people by saying the same thing. In his way, he was telling me to lie. So to be clear, Mr. Trump knew of and directed the Trump Moscow negotiations throughout the campaign and lied about it.michael barbaroCohen’s almost describing, in this moment, a code, where, if Trump is saying to him, there is no Russia project, it’s almost like saying, there’s no Russia project, right? You’re never going to say there’s a Russia project. It’s like he’s trying to explain a foreign language in which Donald Trump is communicating to him, you should probably lie about this, without having to say it.maggie habermanThat’s exactly right. And he said that in his testimony, made very clear that this is how Donald Trump talks. He sort of knows where the line is, and he doesn’t speak overtly. It is what former federal prosecutors have described as mob speak, the style that mafia bosses speak in to avoid crossing a legal line. And while Michael Cohen did not explicitly say that part, he did say that Donald Trump spoke in a code and that Michael Cohen understood that code.archived recording (michael cohen)He doesn’t give you questions. He doesn’t give you orders. He speaks in a code. And I understand the code, because I’ve been around him for a decade.michael barbaroMaggie, did it come as a surprise to you to hear Michael Cohen saying any of this? You’ve known both of these men for years. And you’ve known them as a unit. What was it like to hear Cohen saying these things about Donald Trump?maggie habermanEven knowing that this was coming, it was mind-blowing hearing Michael Cohen saying this in public. No one who has worked for Trump in recent years has gone on the record to say things like this. And it was staggering. And it was so at odds with the portrait of fealty that Michael Cohen had presented with reporters, with everyone, toward Donald Trump over a decade.michael barbaroMm-hmm.maggie habermanAnd remember, Donald Trump creates an eagerness in people around him to get something of a head pat from him, to get an encouragement, to get an attaboy. Cohen got very skilled at trying for that attaboy.michael barbaroAnd seemed to be kind of addicted to it.maggie habermanAnd seemed to be addicted to it, seemed to revel in it, clearly reveled in his proximity.archived recording (michael cohen)Over the past year or so, I have done some real soul-searching. And I see now that my ambition and the intoxication of Trump power had much to do with the bad decisions, in part, that I made.maggie habermanHe was involved in taking care of messes that Donald Trump wanted taken care of. He was willing to do those things. One of them was payoffs to women. And the notion that somebody who was so closely involved in that would be willing to discuss it publicly, not just behind closed doors with investigators, not just as prosecutors were bearing down on him, but freely, in public, in a hearing, under oath, was just breathtaking.michael barbaroThere’s a moment where Cohen says to the members of the committee —archived recording (michael cohen)The last time I appeared before Congress, I came to protect Mr. Trump. Today —michael barbaroToday, I’m here to tell you the truth —archived recording (michael cohen)I am here to tell the truth about Mr. Trump.michael barbaro— about Mr. Trump. As if to say, the spell has been broken. I’m out of that world now. And I kind of wonder if that’s really possible, but also how it happened.maggie habermanWell, I think it is really possible, because I think their break has been so incredibly clean, given what has happened to Michael Cohen. Remember, when the F.B.I. raided his hotel and apartment and office in April of 2018, he was still standing by Trump. That clearly has changed. We saw Republicans argue that the reason that changed for Michael Cohen was because he was facing charges of his own. And the president has certainly suggested that. Cohen has been utterly stripped of everything that he valued, his business, his law license. He has been humiliated publicly. He has been abandoned by a lot of friends, and by the president, and by the president’s circle. And so I do think that it is certainly a real split. I think that people are going to have to assess, looking at his testimony, whether they think it’s a real conversion, but it’s definitely a real break.archived recording (michael cohen)I am not a perfect man. I have done things I am not proud of. And I will live with the consequences of my actions for the rest of my life. But today, I get to decide the example that I set for my children and how I attempt to change how history will remember me. I may not be able to change the past, but I can do right by the American people here today. And I thank you for your attention. And I’m happy to answer the committee’s questions.archived recording (elijah cummings)Thank you very much, Mr. Cohen. I now recognize myself.michael barbaroSo then the questions begin from the committee members.maggie habermanRight.archived recording (elijah cummings)You said you brought some checks, is that right?archived recording (michael cohen)Yes, sir.maggie habermanAnd first we have Cummings asking Cohen to elaborate on the details of these reimbursement checks that he got, that he brought with him.archived recording (elijah cummings)So let me make sure I understand. Donald Trump wrote you a check out of his personal account while he was serving as president of the United States of America to reimburse you for hush money payments to Ms. Clifford, is that what you are telling the American people today?archived recording (michael cohen)Yes, Mr. Chairman.maggie habermanAnd it was among the more dramatic moments that we saw. Because Cummings is getting to the fact that the sitting president was part of this scheme that was, at minimum, sleazy and illicit, and at maximum could have some criminal exposure. And they were leaving nothing to doubt as to what Cohen was saying took place.archived recording (elijah cummings)Is there any doubt in your mind that President Trump knew exactly what he was paying for?archived recording (michael cohen)There is no doubt in my mind. And I truly believe there is no doubt in the minds of the people of the United States of America.archived recording (elijah cummings)With that I’ll yield to —maggie habermanJim Jordan, another ally of the president, quoted something that Michael Cohen once said to a reporter from The Daily Beast.archived recording (jim jordan)“I will make sure that you and I meet one day while we’re in the courthouse and I will take you for every penny you still don’t have.”maggie habermanAnd this has now become a famous anecdote, where he threatened a reporter who was pursuing a story about an old court claim from the divorce filing between Ivana Trump and Donald Trump, where she had alleged marital rape. And Cohen said —archived recording (jim jordan)“And I will come after your Daily Beast and everybody else that you possibly know. So I’m warning you — ”maggie haberman“So I’m warning you, tread very f-ing lightly” — it wasn’t f-ing.archived recording (jim jordan)“Because what I’m going to do to you is going to be f-ing disgusting, you understand me?”maggie habermanAnd he was then asked by Jim Jordan, “Mr. Cohen, who said that?”archived recording (jim jordan)Mr. Cohen, who said that?archived recording (michael cohen)I did.maggie habermanAnd it’s an incident that I think he would say that he really was doing for Trump and not for himself. But it was a way to sully his character and create a portrait of thuggishness.archived recording (jim jordan)And did you say that, Mr. Cohen, was that statement that I just read that you admitted to saying, did you do that to protect Donald Trump?archived recording (michael cohen)I did it to protect Mr. Trump, Donald Trump, Jr., Ivanka Trump and Eric Trump.michael barbaroBut I wonder, who does it look worse for, the person who did it, or the person on whose behalf it was done?maggie habermanRight. I understand that Jim Jordan is trying to muddy Michael Cohen with that. But I think for most people, they are going to look at that, and especially after the president takes to Twitter and suggests that people ought to be looking into Michael Cohen’s family, I think most people are still going to see that as looking worse for Trump, because Michael Cohen was doing this as Trump’s lawyer.michael barbaroSo while Republicans are largely avoiding talking about the president at all costs in this hearing, in focusing on sullying Cohen’s character and reputation, they may be actually sullying President Trump’s.maggie habermanCorrect. They were essentially trying to peel Cohen off from Trump. And what became clear as their efforts went on throughout the hearing is that that is impossible to do. When you have had somebody serve as a lawyer for Donald Trump, so identified with him publicly over 10 years, you can’t take a shot at Cohen and not end up having it ricochet onto Trump too.archived recordingSo we’ve established that you lie on your taxes, you lie to banks, and you have been convicted of lying to Congress. It seems to me that there’s not much that you won’t lie about when you stand to gain from it.michael barbaroAnd where do the questions go from here?maggie habermanSo —archived recordingEverything’s been made of your lies in the past. I’m concerned about your lies today.maggie habermanAfter that it became a, you know —archived recordingBut there’s no truth with you whatsoever.maggie haberman— one by one, down the line, Republicans suggesting that Michael Cohen was —archived recordingLiar, liar, pants on fire.maggie habermanReally in it for the fame.archived recordingIs your appearance here today motivated by your desire to remain in the spotlight for your personal benefit?archived recording (michael cohen)No, ma’am.maggie habermanOr he was really in it for the money. They asked him —archived recordingIs there a book deal coming or anything like that?archived recording (michael cohen)I have no book deal right now.maggie habermanOne after the other about prospective book deals or movie deals.archived recordingIsn’t it true you tried to sell a book about your time with President Trump, entitled “Trump Revolution: From the Tower to the White House, Understanding Donald J. Trump“?archived recording (michael cohen)Yes, that happened —maggie habermanOr had he pitched a book of his own?michael barbaroAnd what did he say?maggie habermanHe said yes.archived recording (michael cohen)I have been contacted by many, including for television, a movie. If you want to tell me who you would like to play you, I’m more than happy to write the name down.michael barbaroAnd what about the Democrats?archived recording (elijah cummings)Mr. Raskin.archived recording (jamie raskin)Mr. Cohen, thank you for your composure today. Our colleagues are not upset because you lied to Congress for the president. They’re upset because you’ve stopped lying to Congress for the president.maggie habermanThe Democrats tried to keep it really mostly on Trump and the things that Michael Cohen did for Trump.archived recordingAnd nothing at the Trump Organization was ever done unless it was run through President Donald Trump, correct?archived recording (michael cohen)That’s 100 percent certain.archived recordingO.K.maggie habermanHe described, and it was really interesting, he described everybody as being solely devoted to protecting the brand and reputation of one man, Donald Trump. He said that nothing happened at the company unless Donald Trump was aware of it or signed off on it. He argued that Trump was a demanding and exacting and punishing boss. He described the entire effort as being about maximizing the gold-plated version of Donald Trump that we have all become very familiar with.archived recordingThere’s a recurring refrain in your testimony that says, and yet, I continued to work for him. But at some point you changed. What was the breaking point at which you decided to start telling the truth?archived recording (michael cohen)There are several factors — Helsinki, Charlottesville.maggie habermanHe went on this litany of moments that he said disgusted him. There were the president’s comments after Charlottesville, that it was, you know, various instance of discourteous behavior by the president, of untoward behavior toward citizens.archived recording (michael cohen)Watching the daily destruction of our civility to one another, putting up silly things like this.archived recordingOh, that’s silly.archived recording (michael cohen)Really unbecoming of Congress.maggie habermanHe clearly got angry. And then he sort of turned it back on Republicans and said to them, essentially —archived recording (michael cohen)It’s that sort of behavior that I’m responsible for. I’m responsible for your silliness. Because I did the same thing that you’re doing now, for 10 years. I protected Mr. Trump for 10 years.maggie habermanYou are what I was. You are all blindly following him. And there is a real risk to doing that, because you could end up like me someday.archived recording (michael cohen)And I can only warn people, the more people that follow Mr. Trump, as I did blindly, are going to suffer the same consequences that I’m suffering.maggie habermanIt was a gripping and captivating moment.michael barbaroRight, it was a sort of surprising level of self-awareness, and I guess also self-loathing too.maggie habermanIt was both. It was self-effacing. It was clearly uncomfortable. It was acknowledging that he is a deeply imperfect person who did imperfect things that he is not proud of, and he said a version of that earlier in the hearing. But it was really striking, because this is a comment that Republicans who opposed Donald Trump, and they’re not very many of them who are that vocal anymore, but that they have said repeatedly that the Republican Party has become a cult of personality, or just a cult. And that people just blindly follow along with what Donald Trump wants, whether it is wise or not, whether it is safe or not, and whether he is telling the truth or not. And that is what Cohen was getting at.archived recordingWhat do you want your children to know?archived recording (michael cohen)That I’m sorry for everything. And I’m sorry for the pain that I’ve caused them. And um — I wish I could go back in time.archived recordingThank you, I yield back.archived recording (elijah cummings)The gentlelady’s time has expired.michael barbaroMaggie, I wonder if you feel like you understand what’s motivating Michael Cohen throughout this hours-long hearing, to say what he’s saying, to concede what he’s conceding, to kind of humble himself the way he did. He’s been convicted of a crime. He’s headed to prison. He has been disbarred. What exactly is animating him at this point?maggie habermanI think a number of things are animating him. But I think among them is that he doesn’t want to be the leper of this story forever. He said months ago that he does not want to be the villain in the Trump story. And I think that’s how he feels. I think that he does not want to be remembered as this footnote in history. I think he’s going to prison. And I think he doesn’t have a whole lot left to lose. And I think that he would like to try to make people remember other things about him and tell a more nuanced tale.michael barbaroAnd so, what did this hearing, in your mind, achieve? How will this hearing be remembered in this larger story?maggie habermanI think this hearing is either going to be, on its own, just a breathtaking historical moment, the likes of which I don’t know if we’ll ever see again. But it was pretty striking to see. Or it is going to be the initial phases of a much broader, deeper governmental investigation by House Democrats into the Trump presidency, not just his own personal activities, but the activities of his government. And allowing Michael Cohen to have a setting where he talks about these things, and where he can be questioned, and where he is a key starting witness could be the first step in paving the way toward an impeachment process, if that is where Democrats go. If that ends up leading to something bigger, then Democrats will feel as if this was a key foundation for it. But it’s too early to say, I think.archived recording (michael cohen)I have some closing remarks I would like to say myself. Is this an appropriate time?archived recording (elijah cummings)You can do it now.archived recording (michael cohen)Thank you.michael barbaroMaggie, how does this one of hearing finally come to an end?maggie habermanSeven and a half hours after Michael Cohen first entered this room, sitting pretty patiently through all of these questions, not losing his temper, he was given an opportunity to speak not just to the committee members, but to the president.archived recording (michael cohen)In closing, I’d like to say directly to the president, we honor our veterans, even in the rain. You tell the truth, even when it doesn’t aggrandize you.maggie habermanAnd he used that opportunity to send a message to his former boss, saying, you don’t need to be this person.archived recording (michael cohen)You take responsibility for your own dirty deeds. You don’t use your power of your bully pulpit to destroy the credibility of those who speak out against you. You don’t separate families from one another or demonize those looking to America for a better life. You don’t vilify people based on the God they pray to. And you don’t cuddle up to our adversaries at the expense of our allies.maggie habermanAnd what he was saying to the president, you and I both know who you are, and he was saying to the members of the committee, you should believe me when I say that I understand this man.archived recording (michael cohen)So to those who support the president and his rhetoric, as I once did, I pray the country doesn’t make the same mistakes that I have made or pay the heavy price that my family and I are paying. And I thank you very much for this additional time, Chairman.archived recording (elijah cummings)Thank you very much.maggie habermanAnd when Michael Cohen was done, Elijah Cummings closed with this note of grace toward Michael Cohen.archived recording (elijah cummings)So you wonder whether people believe you. I don’t know. I don’t know whether they believe you. But the fact is that you’ve come, you have your head down. And this has got to be one of the hardest things that you could do.maggie habermanThat was the moment when Michael Cohen started crying. And he really hadn’t done that. He was clearly weeping.archived recording (elijah cummings)I know that you face a lot. I know that you are worried about your family. But this is a part of your destiny.maggie habermanAnd Cummings basically told Cohen, you are doing what you should be doing. You are heading toward the light in this moment.archived recording (elijah cummings)And hopefully, this portion of your destiny will lead to a better — a better Michael Cohen, a better Donald Trump, a better United States of America and a better world.michael barbaroMaggie, thank you very, very much. We appreciate it.maggie habermanMichael, thanks for having me.archived recording (elijah cummings)And we have got to get back to normal. With that, this meeting is adjourned. [MUSIC PLAYING]michael barbaroWe’ll be right back. Here’s what else you need to know today. On Wednesday, Pakistan said it had shot down two Indian fighter jets and captured a pilot from one of them in the latest escalation of hostilities between the two countries. The attack is heightening fears that the decades-old animosities between India and Pakistan could spiral into war. The latest episode began on February 14th, when jihadis operating out of Pakistan killed 40 Indian soldiers, prompting airstrikes from India, and now, a military response from Pakistan.archived recording[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] Bomb blast victims in [INAUDIBLE].michael barbaroIn a speech on Wednesday, the prime minister of Pakistan urged restraint, citing the two countries’ arsenals of nuclear weapons, saying quote, “All big wars have been due to miscalculation. My question to India is that given the weapons we have, can we afford miscalculation?”archived recording[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]michael barbaroAnd in North Carolina on Wednesday, a campaign operative at the center of allegations of election fraud, McCrae Dallas, was arrested and indicted over his handling of absentee ballots in 2016 and 2018. Dallas, who collected absentee ballots for Republican congressional candidate Mark Harris last fall, was charged with obstruction of justice and possession of absentee ballots. As a result of Dallas’ conduct, North Carolina will hold a new election for the 9th congressional district. Harris, who hired Dallas, has withdrawn from that race. [MUSIC PLAYING] That’s it for The Daily. I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.“People that follow Mr. Trump as I did blindly are going to suffer the same consequences that I’m suffering,” he told a packed hearing of the House Committee on Oversight and Reform — a blunt warning to congressional Republicans he said have assumed the same role as Mr. Trump’s protectors that he played for years.During hours of lurid testimony, the president’s once-loyal lawyer and fixer recalled shady business deals and racist comments, and spoke in devastating, uncomfortable detail about his private conversations with the man he had idolized and still refers to only as “Mr. Trump.”Michael D. Cohen, the former lawyer and fixer for President Donald J. Trump, took the stand on Wednesday morning to testify publicly against Mr. Trump before the House Oversight Committee.[Mr. Trump “inflated” the value of his assets in documents given to Deutsche Bank, Mr. Cohen testified.]Such deference did not keep him from painting a damning portrait of the president, including Mr. Trump’s attempts to dodge Vietnam War service and his efforts to strong-arm academic institutions from making his grades public. There were the routine indignities, like when the president put Mr. Cohen on the phone with the first lady to lie to her about a hush money payment to Stormy Daniels, the pornographic film star with whom Mr. Trump is alleged to have had an affair.Mr. Cohen described Mr. Trump as a “con man” and a “cheat,” and estimated there might have been 500 occasions on which he directly threatened someone at the behest of his boss. He was Mr. Trump’s enforcer, a role he once seemed to relish.“If somebody does something Mr. Trump doesn’t like, I do everything in my power to resolve it to Mr. Trump’s benefit,” he told an interviewer in 2011. “If you do something wrong, I’m going to come at you, grab you by the neck, and I’m not going to let you go until I’m finished.”More recently, after Mr. Cohen agreed to tell prosecutors about hush-money payments before the 2016 election, it was the president’s turn to use a Mafioso’s description of his formerly loyal aide. He called him a “rat.”Such was the vernacular the two men honed over years spent navigating gritty but potentially lucrative New York industries — construction, real estate and taxicabs. At the hearing, Mr. Cohen gave the House panel a tutorial of sorts on the folkways of a New York ecosystem in which he and Mr. Trump had thrived.On the day that Mr. Cohen was the star witness in a congressional hearing devised to exhume the president’s past, Mr. Trump was thousands of miles away — preparing for a summit meeting with North Korea’s leader he was hoping would lend gravitas to his embattled presidency, and distract from what was taking place back home.For Mr. Cohen, a man who once walked the hallways of the Trump Organization with a pistol strapped to his ankle and seemed to bask in Mr. Trump’s reflected glory, Wednesday was a moment to absorb the light.“Michael would describe it as being something akin to a cult,” said Donny Deutsch, the advertising executive and friend of Mr. Cohen. “Michael got sucked into it. And his life is in shambles because of it. And he’s the first one to say that.”The relationship between the two men began in the way that many of Mr. Trump’s relationships do: with an act of fealty.In 2006, residents of Trump World Tower — a gleaming glass tower near the United Nations — were pushing to strip Mr. Trump’s name from the building and take control of the building’s management.Mr. Cohen, a former personal injury lawyer who had made millions in the New York City taxicab business, intervened after Mr. Trump’s son Donald Jr. asked for help. Mr. Cohen had already bought several condominiums in Trump buildings, persuaded family and friends to do the same, and had twice read Mr. Trump’s book “The Art of the Deal.” He helped Mr. Trump put down the East Side rebellion, orchestrating a coup that removed the revolting tenants from the condominium board. Mr. Trump took notice.In some ways, it was an unequal relationship between two men of different ages, different upbringings and vastly different financial circumstances. Mr. Cohen, the son of a Holocaust survivor, was just 40 years old when he began working for Mr. Trump — 20 years his elder and the son of a real estate magnate who would inherit millions of dollars of his father’s money.But Mr. Cohen had a comfortable upbringing in Lawrence, on Long Island, a dozen or so miles from the house in Queens where Mr. Trump had been raised. And like his future boss, Mr. Cohen combined raw business savvy with help from a family member — in his case, his father-in-law — to make a mark in the boroughs outside Manhattan.Mr. Cohen was soon a Trump Organization employee, put in charge of disparate elements of Mr. Trump’s business empire. In 2008, he became chief operating officer of Affliction Entertainment, a venture started by Mr. Trump to bring mixed martial arts fights to a pay-per-view audience.“I’m nearly speechless knowing Mr. Trump and Affliction have the trust in me for an event that features the greatest assembly of M.M.A. fighters for one show in M.M.A. history,” Mr. Cohen said in a news release announcing his new position, adding that the coming event was “like having Ali, Frazier, Tyson, Holyfield and other top heavyweights all on the same boxing card.”Working for Mr. Trump, he told lawmakers on Wednesday, was “intoxicating.”“When you were in his presence,” he said, “you felt like you were involved in something greater than yourself — that you were somehow changing the world.”He tried to appeal to his boss by embodying the qualities that Mr. Trump had once admired in his own mentor, Roy Cohn. A Bronx-born lawyer, Mr. Cohn rose to prominence working for Senator Joseph McCarthy’s anti-Communist crusade and then spent years as Mr. Trump’s lawyer. Like Mr. Cohen, he was disbarred for unethical conduct.Wednesday’s congressional hearing is focusing in part on how much Trump knew about hush money payments and a proposed Trump Tower in Moscow.“Roy was brutal, but he was a very loyal guy,” Mr. Trump once told a biographer. “He brutalized for you.”Over time, Mr. Cohen learned how Mr. Trump liked to do business.“He doesn’t give you questions, he doesn’t give you orders,” he said on Wednesday. “He speaks in code, and I understand the code because I’ve been around him for a decade.”In 2011 Mr. Cohen began scouting prospects for another brawl, a possible presidential run by Mr. Trump in 2012. He traveled to Iowa and accompanied Mr. Trump to a speech at the Conservative Political Action Conference, where he acted like a bar bouncer keeping reporters away from his celebrity boss. Mr. Cohen set up a website called ShouldTrumpRun.org.He did not. But almost immediately after the presidential race was over, Mr. Cohen began compiling information for his boss for the next time. He kept a thick binder on his desk at Trump Tower packed with information about filing deadlines in different states for the 2016 election and other campaign minutiae.But he was shunted to the sidelines when the campaign began, prohibited by Mr. Trump’s children and other political operatives from making day-to-day campaign decisions. He pursued other business ventures for Mr. Trump, including the ambitious idea of building the tallest skyscraper in Moscow emblazoned with the Trump name.Trying to gain access to influential figures in Moscow, Mr. Cohen turned to Felix Sater, a Russian immigrant, felon and F.B.I. informant who had helped Mr. Trump with other development deals and had explored various ventures in Russia.This effort became a central focus of the investigation by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, who is examining Russia’s attempts to sabotage the 2016 election and any role Mr. Trump’s advisers played in coordinating with Moscow. And the lies Mr. Cohen told about the negotiations put him in even more legal jeopardy.On Wednesday, he apologized to lawmakers for lying to a different congressional panel in 2017, when he said that the Trump Tower Moscow negotiations ended in January 2016, before the first presidential primaries. In fact, they continued for months longer.“To be clear,” he said, “Mr. Trump knew of and directed the Trump Moscow negotiations throughout the campaign and lied about it. He lied about it because he never expected to win. He also lied about it because he stood to make hundreds of millions of dollars on the Moscow real estate project.”“And so I lied about it, too,” he added.After he won the election, Mr. Trump brought many of his longtime confidants to the White House, but Mr. Cohen was left behind. He was disappointed but remained a loyal backbencher, raising money for Mr. Trump’s re-election fund and publicly attacking celebrities like Snoop Dogg and Johnny Depp for their anti-Trump comments.Republicans at Wednesday’s hearing tried to cast Mr. Cohen as an embittered former aide trying to get payback for being excluded from a White House job. On Twitter, Mr. Trump’s son Eric said that Mr. Cohen was known within the campaign to be seeking a job.Mr. Cohen has insisted over the past two years — and did again on Wednesday — that he never had any interest in moving to Washington, uprooting his family and giving up his job as Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer. He said that Mr. Trump had wanted him for a White House job, and was upset when it did not work out.Regardless of the actual circumstances, Mr. Cohen’s absence from the administration created a distance between Mr. Cohen and Mr. Trump that would become a chasm.When F.B.I. agents raided Mr. Cohen’s office and apartment last April, carting off years of business records, emails and other documents, Mr. Cohen relied on his first instinct — he would not flip.He took at least one call from Mr. Trump, who urged him to stay strong. His lawyers strategized with the president’s, and Mr. Trump praised him and insisted his former fixer and lawyer would never cooperate with prosecutors.That would change by July, as his legal problems mounted and his friends urged him not to take the fall for Mr. Trump. He changed his Twitter bio page, removing any mention of being Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer, a move people close to him said was a deliberate signal of his independence.Around that time, officials at Mr. Trump’s company began to balk at paying some of Mr. Cohen’s legal fees.He pleaded guilty in August to financial crimes, and in his guilty plea he implicated his former boss in a scheme to pay hush money to two women before the 2016 election.It was an extraordinary turn for a once-devoted soldier — a decision that Mr. Cohen on Wednesday described as a catharsis.“I have lied, but I am not a liar. I have done bad things, but I am not a bad man,” he said before a hushed room.“I have fixed things. But I am no longer your fixer, Mr. Trump.”An earlier version of this article misstated the name of the building where Michael D. Cohen put down a rebellion by tenants. It is Trump World Tower, not Trump World Plaza.OpinionNoah BookbinderAdvertisement