https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/21/your-money/learning-to-get-along-as-life-inevitably-changes.html
Rolling With the Punches, at Any Stage of Life - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1309
AdvertisementSupported byShortcutsBy Alina TugendOVER the last eight years, Teresa Mears has cycled through enough change to last a lifetime: a partner’s death, helping to care for a mother with Alzheimer’s, leaving a steady job just before the recession hit, and the loss of her house.She struggled but managed to cobble together a freelance business and rent a condominium in the same trendy Miami neighborhood where she had lived for years.Then in 2013, she lost a major client and the condominium was sold.“My first instinct was to find another anchor client, but my second response (which I went with) was relief at not having to write every day,” Ms. Mears, 58, wrote on a thread about changing one’s work life on FreelanceSuccess, a website for freelance writers.Forced to remake her life once more, Ms. Mears, somewhat unwillingly, decided to buy an inexpensive house in a 55-plus community in suburban Fort Lauderdale, and turned her part-time web business, Living on the Cheap into a major source of income.And, to her surprise, she said, “I’m happy in my situation. I like my neighbors. I’m not tied to a desk at this point in my life when I want more freedom.”Ms. Mears may be facing some particularly modern-day transitions. But it was more than 2,000 years ago that the Greek philosopher Heraclitus wrote that change is the only constant in life.So, if there is no such thing as a life without change — and most of us would not willingly embrace such a life anyway — why does it feel so difficult? Are there ways to manage it that don’t involve a couch and the fetal position?The problem is that change involves “letting go of what we know to be the current reality, and embracing new thought,” said Jaynelle F. Stichler, professor emeritus at San Diego State University’s School of Nursing. “Even something as seemingly mundane as changing the brand of toilet paper can cause a reaction.”Changes often make us feel out of control, so if small things can upset our equilibrium, big things can really throw us for a loop. And it’s particularly hard if change is foisted upon us, rather than being something we choose.What is important to remember is that it is the fear of change rather than the reality of change that is the real culprit. As the French philosopher Michel de Montaigne noted, “My life has been filled with terrible misfortune, most of which never happened.”In fact, in general, we are very bad predictors of how an event — bad or good — is going to affect us emotionally in the future, said Deborah Carr, a professor of sociology at Rutgers University. Research in a field of study known as affective forecasting shows that although most people think something good will make them very happy over the long term and something negative will make them very unhappy, that is often not true.Researchers have turned up many examples of the phenomenon. Just one is a common belief among assistant professors that obtaining tenure — or not — will affect their long-term happiness. But a study in affective forecasting by a team led by Daniel Gilbert, a professor of psychology at Harvard University, found that those who had received tenure over the last few years and those who had not were equally happy.So the bad news is that promotion or award won’t necessarily be as thrilling as we anticipate. But the good news is that job loss or relationship demise won’t be as devastating as we fear, said Professor Carr, who has studied how people cope in widowhood.“We shouldn’t view change as wholly good or wholly bad,” she said. Rather, it’s necessary to identify both the positives and negatives that come with just about any life shift.And of course, we’re all different. Some people thrive on change, others fear it, and a majority are somewhere in the middle, Professor Stichler said.Most of us assume that change is harder as we get older and that young people greet life’s ups and downs with more flexibility. For example, those in their 50s and 60s may have more difficulty adjusting to changes in the world of work, with its greater insecurity and volatility, than younger employees who see it as the norm.Nonetheless, while millennials in the work force may not have the same expectations as their older colleagues, that doesn’t mean they will embrace insecurity in midlife, said Lisabeth Saunders Medlock, a psychologist, coach and consultant.Most people in their 20s and early 30s don’t have the responsibilities that accrue as we get older — a spouse or partner, children, a mortgage and later, perhaps, caring for elderly parents, Ms. Medlock said.“People become dependent on you,” she said. “You think, ‘If I go down, the ship goes down.’”And while it may be harder, in some ways, to adapt to life transformations as we get older — when we are more set in our ways and our lives are more complicated — in other ways it can be easier.“When you’re young and something doesn’t go right, you think it’s the end of the world,” Ms. Mears said. “When you’re older, you’ve seen it happen before, you know it will work out — and if not, you’ll move on.”One thing is clear, though. Most people recover after even the most difficult changes, Professor Carr said, but it’s much easier to bounce back if you have emotional, social and financial resources.So how do we bend with, rather than resist, the inevitability of change?First of all, remember that sometimes being catapulted out of that job or relationship is what’s needed.“We can all tolerate low-grade unhappiness,” Professor Carr said. “Something really bad has to happen to jolt us out of our complacency and make a change.”And while we may long for stability, particularly during tumultuous times, it isn’t inherently good.“You might have the same marriage, the same job, but were you happy?” Ms. Medlock said. That doesn’t mean you move on every time you feel uncomfortable, she said, but you also have to be willing to leave a situation that is making you miserable.“It’s about finding a balance,” she said.Being informed and engaged in a change can make it easier to accept, said Professor Stichler, who has written on coping with change and is co-editor of HERD: Health Environments Research & Design Journal, which specializes in health care facility design research. But don’t be surprised if even people who seemed most enthusiastic are unhappy once the change occurs, she said.“It seems that we have great difficulty letting go of what is familiar even when the familiar does not work well,” she said.For example, Professor Stichler said, it is not uncommon for doctors and staff members who were heavily involved in the design of a new hospital to complain about it once it is finished.That could be because some people have a hard time envisioning what is going to happen, and then feel resentful when it doesn’t match their expectations, she said.Finally, when a change you don’t want is forced on you — such as being laid off from a job — it’s easy to descend into a “shame spiral,” Ms. Medlock said. “You blame yourself even if it had nothing to do with you. You need to say, ‘I have these feelings,’ and then move on. You can’t keep carrying that weight.”■Speaking of change, after 10 years, this is my last Shortcuts column. When I was asked to write a biweekly column almost exactly a decade ago, I never dreamed it would last this long. It has been a wonderful ride and afforded me the chance to speak to some of the most interesting and thoughtful people in the world on everything from death to laundry soap. And to develop wonderful virtual relationships with many readers who — with some exceptions — offered countless kind and insightful comments over the years.Please, keep in touch, either at alina@alinatugend.com, @atugend or through my website, www.alinatugend.com. And to once again quote that Greek philosopher Heraclitus, remember, “Life is flux.”Advertisement