https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/16/opinion/shutdown-federal-workers-trump.html
Opinion | The Chart That Shows the Financial Peril Facing Federal Workers  - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
961
AdvertisementSupported byJust like many Americans, many government workers don’t have much emergency money set aside. By Michael Gelman, Matthew D. Shapiro, Shachar Kariv, Steven Tadelis and Dan SilvermanThe authors are economics professors. Last Friday, the United States government failed to pay more than 800,000 of its workers. How will they cope with a payless payday?For many Americans, the loss of a single paycheck can result in lasting damage and real hardship, and the same is true for government workers. We studied thousands of federal employees after the government shutdown of 2013. It was a relatively short shutdown, and because it didn’t cover a complete pay cycle, it reduced only one paycheck by 40 percent. The workers spent less and briefly delayed making payments on mortgages, rent and credit cards. Most emerged without lasting damage to their finances. Furthermore, they eventually got their missing pay.But this shutdown is altogether different. It covers an entire two-week pay period, so Friday’s paycheck was not just smaller, it was missing entirely.That’s where the trouble starts. Our study showed that a large majority of government workers didn’t have enough money in the bank to cover expenses for two weeks. Almost two-thirds of federal workers likely have less than two weeks of expenses set aside to live, based on research of the 2013 government shutdown. Percentage of federal workers by the number of days’ expenses they can cover with cash reserves.Less than 1 day1–7 days28%18%18%36%Two weeks or moreOne to two weeksLess than 1 day1–7 days28%18%18%One to two weeks36%Two weeks or moreBy The New York Times | Sources: Michael Gelman, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan Silverman and Steven Tadelis About 20 percent just made it paycheck to paycheck; they had less than a typical day’s worth of spending in their accounts on the day before payday. This is not unusual even for people like federal employees who hold steady jobs at steady pay.In this shutdown, however, it means that most affected workers will need to take multiple measures, sharply cutting discretionary spending and being late paying mortgages, rent and other bills.It gets worse. There are few signs that this shutdown will soon be resolved and uncertainty about whether the workers will get paid retroactively.Even if President Trump and Congress can’t reach an agreement to end the shutdown, they should, in the meantime, reduce the needless hardship to these workers and guarantee they will be paid when the shutdown is complete. On Monday, some progress was made on this front: Congress passed a bill under which all affected government workers would receive their lost pay as soon as the shutdown ends. Mr. Trump, whose executive order to freeze federal pay for 2019 signals little sympathy with the government’s work force, should sign the bill. Otherwise the late payments that bankers and landlords tolerated in 2013 expecting prompt payment after the shutdown could turn into deep debt and evictions.If the shutdown continues much longer, workers may face lasting financial damage even if they ultimately receive retroactive pay. If they miss a second paycheck, they will be short an entire month’s worth of spending power. Sure, some landlords and bill collectors may heed Mr. Trump’s call to “be nice and easy” on federal employees — but some won’t. Hits to credit scores from late payments do lasting harm.The thousands of government employees should not find themselves fighting off creditors because our elected officials can’t stop fighting among themselves.Matthew D. Shapiro is an economics professor at the University of Michigan. Shachar Kariv and Steven Tadelis are economics professors at the University of California, Berkeley. Michael Gelman is an economics professor at Claremont McKenna College. Dan Silverman is an economics professor at Arizona State University.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement