http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/14/arts/television/westworld-a-show-thats-amazing-but-not-necessarily-good.html
‘Westworld’ Reveals a Big Twist, but Little Heart - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1263
AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy James PoniewozikWell? Did you call it?“Trompe L’Oeil,” the seventh episode of HBO’s “Westworld,” revealed a twist that some sharp viewers had guessed almost from the show’s beginning. (This is the point at which I ask the spoiler-averse to hop aboard the departing train from Sweetwater Station.) Bernard Lowe (Jeffrey Wright), the head programmer for an Old West theme park populated with lifelike robots, is — to his own surprise — himself a robot.If you, like me, did not call it, don’t worry; there are plenty of other theories floating out there. That the park’s supposedly deceased co-founder Arnold is still around, in human or cyber form. That the mysterious Man in Black (Ed Harris) is actually the park visitor William (Jimmi Simpson), 30 years later. That the park’s mastermind, Dr. Robert Ford (Anthony Hopkins), is also a robot.Maybe everyone else is a robot, too. Maybe you are! (How would you know? Mind. Blown.)At this point, in fact, it’s beginning to feel like the puzzles have gained sentience, Skynet-style, and killed off every other aspect of “Westworld.” This makes for a series that is cool, awesome, amazing — but not necessarily good.Don’t get me wrong: I have spent precious weeks of my limited time on Earth theorizing about “Twin Peaks,” “The X-Files” and “Lost” over the years. It’s a time-honored way of engaging with stories, from detective fiction to the fake-out narratives of marquee cable series like “Mr. Robot,” “American Horror Story” and “True Detective.”“Westworld” is, in one sense, the genre’s lab-engineered supermachine. But in serial television, this kind of puzzle fiction works best when it’s told through people you come to know and care about.To the extent the characters in “Westworld” are compelling, on the other hand, it’s for how little you know them, not how well you do. To a person (or thing), they’re enigmas, and the show invites you to solve them.So many matters that character drama usually establishes first — personality, motive — “Westworld” withholds. The Man in Black, for instance: Is he the sadistic villain that he first seems to be, or just a dedicated gamer trying to defeat the park’s boss level by finding a hidden maze? Is Ford an artist or a megalomaniac?The robots hosts are more interesting than the circuitboard-flat human staffers. But it’s arguable whether they can be said to be “characters” at all in the usual sense, given that they can have their memories overwritten to play entirely different roles. Or rather, maybe they are literally characters — fictional constructs in human shells.Recent episodes address this directly, as Maeve Millay (Thandie Newton) becomes aware of her artificial nature and blackmails her handlers into juicing her intelligence and other stats. She’s revising her own character — but her drive to do that itself has to come from her psyche. Is that drive some innate, inalienable “her,” as opposed to a factory setting? If so, where does it come from?This is all fascinating, but it’s a clinical fascination — a constant prompt, in the show’s words, to “question the nature of your reality.” Everyone in the park is potentially, to borrow a recurring image, a player piano; any situation might be trompe l’oeil. When you don’t know who’s real — or what “real” is — it’s hard to know who to really care about.This makes “Westworld” especially dependent on its mysteries for engagement. And boy, are people engaged. There are dozens of podcasts devoted to parsing it. (The show suggests the park itself has a fan community — one character is excited to discover an “Easter egg” that he’s heard about within a narrative.)But this also means that, if you and the internet hive-mind crack a certain upcoming twist, there’s little reason to invest in the story other than to see if you were right.This kind of storytelling is a trademark of Jonathan Nolan, who created the series with his wife, Lisa Joy, and is known for the M. C. Escher narratives he devised, with his brother Christopher Nolan, for the films “Memento” and “Interstellar.”Twist narratives work differently in series television. You see a movie in a dark room unconnected to the outside world (assuming you obeyed the reminder to switch off your cellphone). The story unfolds all at once. If you guess the solution early, you have a short time to wait to be satisfied or disappointed.In weekly serial TV, on the other hand, you have to sit with it for weeks. And while you wait, it raises the question: What else am I here for? What else do I care about?This is a general risk of the twist-TV genre. Both seasons of the audacious “Mr. Robot” built up to big psych-out revelations based on the unreliable perceptions of Elliot Alderson (Rami Malek). In Season 1, we learned that Mr. Robot (Christian Slater), the companion who goaded Elliot into a computer-hacking scheme, was a hallucination based on Elliot’s father. In the middle of Season 2, we learned that Elliot was in jail and that many of the season’s events had been fantasy.In both cases, fans “Encyclopedia Brown”-ed the twists well in advance — the creator, Sam Esmail, has said he expected them to. And there are other reasons to watch the series, like its bravura direction and critiques of consumerism.But there’s a trade-off: Because so much of the series is filtered through an unreliable narrator, for significant stretches it is, in a way, a story with only one character — we’re not seeing other characters so much as Elliot’s perspective of them. That can make this series, too, easier to admire than to love.Looming behind this genre is “Lost,” the televisual Rubik’s Cube that popularized the idea that a story requires not just an ending but an answer. (“Westworld” is co-executive produced by the “Lost” co-creator J. J. Abrams.) But “Lost,” even as it introduced smoke monsters and tropical polar bears, also developed an ensemble of characters with distinctive voices and rich personalities.If “Westworld” is the “Lost” approach taken to a puzzle-centric extreme, another “Lost” co-creator, Damon Lindelof, went the other way with HBO’s “The Leftovers,” based on a novel by Tom Perrotta.Mr. Lindelof began that series, too, with an unexplained phenomenon — the rapture-like disappearance of 2 percent of humanity. But this time he promised not to explain it, choosing instead to delve into the lives of those left behind and, in the words of the series’s Season 2 theme, “Let the mystery be.”“Westworld,” on the other hand, lets nothing be — it invites you to worry every nugget like a loose tooth. The series is built to engage fans like William, who describes visiting the park as waking up inside a story. “I want to find out what it all means,” he says.This is a story about stories, a puzzle about puzzles, a game about games, gamers and game pieces. That’s both the pleasure and the limitation of “Westworld.” It beckons you into a vast, ornate maze and asks you to trust that you’ll find something human inside, eventually, like the prize at the end.Advertisement