https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/07/books/review/lisa-locascio-open-me-nico-walker-cherry.html
He Wrote a Novel From Jail. She Wrote One About a Different Kind of Imprisonment. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2147
AdvertisementSupported byFictionBy Julie BuntinCHERRY By Nico Walker 317 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $26.95.OPEN ME By Lisa Locascio 279 pp. Grove Press. $25.In the prologue to “Cherry,” the incarcerated novelist Nico Walker’s debut novel, our unnamed narrator shoots heroin with his ex-wife-turned-live-in-girlfriend, Emily. After the dull needle finds his vein he wakes up on the kitchen floor with ice jammed into his underwear — Emily’s attempt to shock him out of overdose. This is our introduction to our narrator’s lodestar. “I love her so much it feels like dying,” he thinks two pages later, high now and on his way to an ill-fated bank robbery. “She’s a beauty and I tell her so all the time. I think she’d do anything for me.”Probably, she would. By the end of the more than 300 pages, the reader still doesn’t know enough about Emily to argue otherwise. Though she’s one of the novel’s organizing principles — the story starts and ends with her — Emily is essentially a quirky collection of details used to give meaning to the narrator’s existence. Recalling having first met her in a college English class in Ohio, the narrator reflects with shame that his first thought about Emily was one of physical desire: “But it was a matter of fate, or something to that effect, what would bring us together, regardless if I ever deserved her.” When Emily transfers to a school in Montreal, he drops out and decides to join the Army. He spends a year serving as a medic in Iraq, and comes back changed; and yet their relationship survives, impossible though it sometimes seems. The novel tracks this progression, as well as their eventual descent into a collaborative junkie hell.By the time heroin addiction catches them in its jaws, Emily is in her mid-20s, teaching college writing and helping the narrator, who is halfheartedly taking classes on the G.I. Bill, grow marijuana in a tent in their living room. After the plants flower and dry, they flip them for dope money. Emily orders salad at McDonald’s. She says “man” a lot. Her male friends want to sleep with her. Our narrator loves the way she “cussed with great beauty” and “always gave you everything and she wasn’t ever fake about it.” That she’s less a woman than a collage at first doesn’t seem much of an issue — the novel is told in the first person, after all, limited to the narrator’s perspective, and what lover can ever truly see his or her beloved? But what’s glossed over ultimately mitigates the intensity of their romance. We never learn why Emily wanted to transfer to a school in Montreal, for instance; though we’re told she’s smart (it’s a point of pride with the narrator), we’re rarely given access to conversations in which she says what she wants or doesn’t want, or shares what she thinks.This shortsightedness doesn’t stop at Emily. Women, when they appear, are categorized by their sexual availability and desirability. Often they’re given no name, and simply assigned to a male character — his woman, his girl. What’s meant by this construct is unclear. Of course, some men really talk this way, but accuracy as justification seems at odds with how the narrator intends to be perceived. He’s a self-professed “scumbag,” sure, but he also underscores his vegetarianism and claims, “I take all the beautiful things to heart … till I about die from it.” He’s sensitive, not to mention extremely damaged by his time at war. But his flashes of gooey adoration for Emily and moments of sympathy for other women feel less genuine than put-on, as if they’ve been carefully planted to distract us from the casual sexism inherent in his voice. I got the impression I was meant to like him. It’s a miracle I credit to the urgency of every aspect of this novel outside of the love story that I often did.“Cherry” is a singular portrait of the opioid epidemic and the United States’ failure to provide adequate support to veterans. It’s full of slapstick comedy, despite gut-clenching depictions of dope sickness, the futility of war and PTSD. The sections on Army life in and out of Iraq offer a searing glimpse into the wretchedness of that American disaster. (“Fort Hood was bleak, a new kind of desert, engineered to induce fatalism in the young. It worked like a charm.”) As a stylist, Walker is un-self-conscious and rangy. He has a gift for the strategically deployed profanity, and writes dialogue so musical and realistic you’ll hear it in the air around you. He can pull off judicious caps lock. And yet, it’s a struggle to root for a novel that relies on a woman for narrative structure even as it constantly undermines her humanity.Emily feels even more spectral in contrast to the all-too-concrete Soren, the primary love interest in Lisa Locascio’s debut novel, “Open Me.” Due to an administrative mix-up, the 18-year-old narrator, Roxana Olsen, who is supposed to be studying abroad in Paris with her best friend, has instead been sent to Denmark. At the airport, bleary with jet lag, she’s scooped up by Soren, a 28-year-old representative from International Abroad Experiences, the program responsible for the mismanagement of her eight-week trip. From their first meeting, Roxana’s perception narrows; despite the newness of her surroundings, all she can see is Soren: “His eyes the blue of a frozen morning under brows like smudges of ash. … He took my hand as if to shake it but didn’t close the grip. My fingers swam in his, little fish.”In the pages that follow, Soren escorts Roxana through Copenhagen and she notes the movements of his arms, the dart of his tongue across his lips. She wonders what he smells like. When they finally sleep together, this accumulated observation boils over into a wash of erotic impressions of both Soren’s body and the ever-changing shape of Roxana’s pleasure. “I bucked and roiled under his tongue and lips and face, falling through a collapsing series of rooms, one into another after another after another, into a shapeless, wonderful bottomlessness.” Locascio is a lovely, imagistic writer, and she’s especially exquisite on the female orgasm, evoking a purple smoke that becomes a motif. “My body took over, tightening and releasing a deep muscle, trying to trap his tongue, to keep him there forever. … Purple, I thought, purple. I saw purple smoke and I came in his mouth.”After this scene, it is no surprise when Roxana accepts Soren’s invitation to abandon the program and accompany him to his uncle’s apartment in the northern peninsula of Jutland, where he plans to work on his Ph.D. thesis, a study of racial identity in the work of a fictional African-American writer, Viola Ash. In Jutland, “Open Me” transforms from a well-written and recognizable Bildungsroman (younger woman meets older man abroad, education ensues) into something much darker, and more interesting. Soren shares a fantasy he’s had since boyhood — of leaving home and coming back to a woman who has spent all day in the house, “keeping the home fires bright.” He repeatedly forgets to make an additional key for the auto-locking apartment door, effectively trapping Roxana inside each morning as he heads to the library. For weeks, she doesn’t leave, half-choosing and half-forced into fulfilling Soren’s dream. This, too, is a subversion of the study-abroad narrative: Instead of being transformed by the external world, Roxana dives inward, spending her days discovering the possibilities of her own pleasure.Roxana obsessively objectifies Soren, but there’s no question he has an inner life she can only guess at; each day he enters the world, leaving her behind. After she gets her period and bleeds onto the bedsheets, Soren begins rejecting her advances, suddenly disgusted by the intensity of her desire and the reality of her body. But Roxana revels in it. “Every membranous violet smear on the gritty toilet paper was proof to me that I existed. … All day I flitted from bodily need to bodily need.” “Open Me” spends nearly as much descriptive time on mucus, crotch odors and the grime that accumulates in the creases of an unshowered body as it does on the violent beauty of sex — a choice perhaps even more daring than the novel’s nuanced exploration of a teenage girl’s sexual imagination.Roxana tries in vain to reignite Soren’s attraction until her fantasies find a new object in Zlatan Zlatar, a local Balkan refugee of whom Soren expresses a hatred laced with anti-immigrant sentiments. Witnessing Soren’s xenophobia, Roxana remains silent, protests weakly or twists herself into defending his thoughts by underscoring how little she knows about Denmark. In this way, she’s complicit. If, when she embarks on an affair with Zlatan, it is to be read in part as a rejection of Soren’s views, Roxana’s sexualization of Zlatan’s perceived otherness chimes uncomfortably with Soren’s thinking.Though the framework is familiar, “Open Me” explodes clichés of female sexuality. On sex and love, it feels transgressive, whereas “Cherry,” for all its freshness of voice, gave me a case of déjà vu.Julie Buntin is the author of “Marlena.”Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.Advertisement