https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/07/nyregion/dont-mess-with-dagger-john.html
Don’t Mess With Dagger John - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1650
AdvertisementSupported byBookshelfBy Sam RobertsIn his St. Patrick’s Day sermon in 1852, John J. Hughes, the newly minted first Roman Catholic archbishop of New York, raised a discomfiting cautionary flag.“There is reason to fear,” Hughes admonished the congregants at Old St. Patrick’s Cathedral on Mulberry Street, “that when God permits men or nations to prosper to the extent of their desires, it is a mark of his disfavor.”His warning that the worldly lure of America’s Manifest Destiny was already threatening his parishioners’ spiritual bonds suggested just how far Irish-Americans had progressed in the more than three decades since Hughes himself had immigrated from County Tyrone.Last year, in their “Sons of Saint Patrick: A History of the Archbishops of New York From Dagger John to Timmytown” (Ignatius Press), George J. Marlin and Brad Miner traced the evolution of the archdiocese. Now, just in time for St. Patrick’s Day, in “Dagger John: Archbishop John Hughes and the Making of Irish America” (Three Hills, Cornell University Press), John Loughery prodigiously profiles the most transformative archbishop of them all.Don’t be cowed because Mr. Loughery’s book is published by an academic press. He has written a comprehensive, insightful and robust biography of a transcendent but neglected figure.The region Hughes inherited as the coadjutor (or assistant) bishop in 1837 “was a nightmare scarcely imaginable today — in religious and civic terms, in educational and hygienic terms,” Mr. Loughery, a Manhattan English teacher, writes.New York’s law barring Catholic priests from even entering the state had been repealed only in 1784. And the growing influx of immigrants — even before the late-1840s famine in Ireland — was mortifying the city’s Protestant, Anglophile and nativist majority.Hughes aggressively defended his flock. After two Philadelphia churches were torched in anti-Catholic rioting, Hughes famously invoked the specter of Russia’s scorched-earth strategy as Napoleon approached. “If a single Catholic Church were burned in New York,” he warned municipal officials in 1844, “the city would become a second Moscow.”He fought for state support for parochial schools (when so-called public schools required Protestant Bible readings). He ostentatiously broke ground for a new St. Patrick’s Cathedral on Fifth Avenue as a bold affirmation of Catholic ascendancy. He founded what became Fordham University.And while he would always insist that the symbol he affixed next to his signature was a crucifix, not a dagger, he redeemed his nickname by his single-minded campaign to recast Irish Catholics as less un-American than they were perceived as being.His aggressive lobbying for parochial school aid provoked violence against the episcopal residence, to which Walt Whitman responded: “Had it been the reverend hypocrite’s head, instead of his windows, we would hardly find it in our soul to be sorrowful.”The prevailing anti-Irish bias might have dissipated sooner but for the 1863 draft riots. Hughes blamed abolitionists for the war. He figured slavery’s demise would have been inevitable. But he favored conscription to preserve the Union.When his poor New Yorkers boisterously rebelled against the double standard that enabled the wealthy to buy their way out of the draft, Hughes initially responded with insipid appeals to the rioters “to retire to their homes with as little delay as possible.”If his vigorous defense of Irish immigrants sometimes crossed accepted boundaries between church and state, the backlash also seems extreme. After the draft riots, the diarist George Templeton Strong concluded: “I am sorry to say that England is right about the Irish.”Even a century later, the Rev. Andrew Greeley would write in “The Catholic Experience” that Hughes, in protecting a flock unable to survive on its own against a hostile environment, was a “fierce and terrible man.”Mr. Loughery is unsparing in his warts-and-all biography, but also more empathic in placing “Dagger John” in perspective as an ambitious prelate whose disagreements with the Vatican over slavery and other issues denied him his coveted red hat.“He had an acid tongue, he never suffered fools gladly, he hated admitting when he was wrong, and at his worst his ego was more befitting a Tammany boss than a servant of Christ — there would be no point denying that,” Mr. Loughery writes. But he adds: “Hughes wanted to be a cardinal, not a saint.”Advertisement