https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/11/us/remembering-kitty-genovese.html
Remembering Kitty Genovese - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2491
AdvertisementSupported byRetro ReportBy Clyde HabermanIn death, Kitty Genovese has cast a long shadow over America’s psyche, far more than she probably would have had her life not been brutally cut short at age 28. Across the decades since her murder in 1964, she has endured as a symbol of urban disconnection and apathy, a victim not only of a knife-wielding killer but of bystanders’ unwillingness to get involved in resisting evil.The New York Times had a pivotal role in creating what is referred to as “Kitty Genovese syndrome.” A front-page article in March 1964 described how 38 of her neighbors heard her screams and watched, yet did nothing, while she was twice attacked and stabbed repeatedly on her way home from her job as a bar manager in Queens.The facts, however, turned out to be quite different. Yes, some neighbors had ignored Ms. Genovese’s pleas for help. But later investigations found that only a couple of them had a clear sense of what was happening, or had even caught glimpses of the attacks as they occurred. Many among the 38 thought they were hearing a fight between drunken people or perhaps lovers. But reality has, to some degree, been beside the point. A paradigm of danger and indifference in an anonymous city had taken hold.This haunting case emerged anew last week with news that the killer, Winston Moseley, had died in prison at age 81 after more than half a century of confinement. (Though Mr. Moseley came to express regret for the murder, he displayed what some might regard as more than a touch of gall when in 1977 he wrote an Op-Ed article for The Times and said of his crime that “it did serve society, urging it as it did to come to the aid of its members in distress or danger.”)Such is the power of the Genovese story that it shaped a segment of the HBO show “Girls,” an episode that eerily ran a day before word of Mr. Moseley’s death. Ms. Genovese’s brother, William J. Genovese, also weighed in, expressing condolences to the Moseley family in a letter to The Times.Retro Report, a series of video documentaries exploring old news stories and their lasting impact, had already been digging into the consequences of the Genovese murder. Among those interviewed was Mary Ann Zielonko, and the accompanying brief video reflects a conversation with her.Ms. Zielonko and Ms. Genovese were lovers, and lived together in an apartment in Kew Gardens, Queens. In the prevailing social climate of the time, they were typically described as merely roommates. But their lesbianism became known to police investigators, and that was enough for them to question Ms. Zielonko as a possible suspect. In fact, Ms. Zielonko, now 77, had been asleep upstairs while the attacks took place on the street and in a building vestibule below.“I was very numb, I would say, from the whole thing,” she told Retro Report. “I felt, wow, she was so close, and I was sleeping and I didn’t know what happened, and that I could have saved her. You know? That’s what I really think still.”Might there still be more lessons to be learned from the torment of Catherine Susan Genovese and the tale of those 38 witnesses? In his letter, William Genovese wrote that “with Winston Moseley’s death comes, maybe, the final chapter in the tragic story.” The operative word in that sentence may very well be “maybe.”The video with this article is part of a documentary series presented by The New York Times. The video project was started with a grant from Christopher Buck. Retro Report has a staff of 13 journalists and 10 contributors led by Kyra Darnton. It is a nonprofit video news organization that aims to provide a thoughtful counterweight to today’s 24/7 news cycle. Previous episodes are at nytimes.com/retroreport. To suggest ideas for future reports, email retroreport@nytimes.com.OpinionAdvertisement