https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/29/theater/if-you-want-to-make-a-hamlet-you-have-to-break-some-rules.html
If You Want to Make a ‘Hamlet,’ You Have to Break Some Rules - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1758
AdvertisementSupported byCritic’s NotebookBy Neil GenzlingerAt any given moment in New York, Shakespeare is being reimagined somewhere, whether on a big stage or in a black box. Now, for instance, you can sample 11 alternative Hamlets for the price of two.At the Flamboyán Theater on the Lower East Side, the New York Shakespeare Exchange is serving up a “Hamlet” in which each of the 10 cast members at some point steps into the title role. And that’s not close to being the most unusual version of the play now running. That honor goes to the almost indescribably daffy “Gary Busey’s One-Man Hamlet as Performed by David Carl.”In that show, a late-Saturday offering at the PIT Loft on West 29th Street in Chelsea, Mr. Carl takes on the persona of Mr. Busey, the well-known, somewhat loopy film actor, and renders an abbreviated “Hamlet” Busey-style: full of tics and wild-eyed detours.It’s a deliciously deranged performance, putting across the “Hamlet” story but also sampling Mr. Busey’s film roles and personal grievances. What is that guitar doing onstage? Surely you remember “The Buddy Holly Story,” the 1978 film in which Mr. Busey played Holly. Mr. Carl’s fake Busey certainly remembers it — it brought him a best-actor Oscar nomination, something he reminds us of even while enacting his “Hamlet.”Mr. Carl, who bears a resemblance to a young Mr. Busey, is always in complete control as he races through this out-of-control performance, relating the action of “Hamlet” with the aid of paper dolls and video projections. He and the director, Michole Biancosino, know just how far to let things run off the rails before bringing Mr. Carl back on point by having him deliver some actual Shakespeare, which he does trippingly. It’s a head-spinning performance.Less successful is “Hamlet10” at the Flamboyán. It serves the text more or less straight, but the director, Ross Williams, cycles all 10 of his actors — five men, five women — through the title role. Some play it only briefly, others for longer stretches.The result is a follow-the-bouncing-ball effect, and Mr. Williams helps the conceit along with flourishes of lively staging. (The performance is done in the round.) Some of his actors manage Hamlet’s lines better than others, however, and the overall point of the treatment isn’t clear. If the idea is that all of us have some Hamlet in us, that’s hardly a revelation. So we’re left with a trick that is interesting for the first hour or so but ultimately not especially revelatory.This information was last updated on Aug. 27, 2018This information was last updated on Aug. 27, 2018­“Gary Busey’s One-Man Hamlet as Performed by David Carl” runs through May 14 at the PIT Loft, 154 West 29th Street, Manhattan; buseyhamlet­.com. Running time: 1 hour 15 minutes. “Hamlet10” runs through April 9 at the Flamboyán Theater, 107 Suffolk Street, Manhattan; 917-428-0065; shakespeareexchange­.org. Running time: 2 hours 30 minutes.Advertisement