https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/16/smarter-living/bridesmaid-how-to.html
So You’ve Been Asked to Be a Bridesmaid. Now What? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
397
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jaya SaxenaMy closet is filled with blue chiffon.I have been a bridesmaid three times, and each time involved purchasing a blue, cocktail-length dress in varying shades and styles, none of which I could recycle for another occasion. So they live in my closet and I pray that, when I am a bridesmaid for the fourth time this May, the bride will choose a different color.Bridesmaids, of course, aren’t mandatory for a wedding, nor should anyone feel obligated to accept an invitation to be one. But at some point you may be asked to participate in this tradition which, like all wedding traditions, is a little ridiculous and a little over the top, but at its core is very sweet. It’s someone saying they love you, they cherish you and they want to look back on an important moment and see you there. (Ideally, there are also people who want you to shut up and look pretty, but we’ll get to them.)Being a bridesmaid is a job loaded with expectation and emotion, and as such, it can be difficult to navigate when you have a life of your own. It’s not that you don’t want to do everything you can for your friend, it’s that nobody talks about how to do it until you’re already doing it, which is a recipe for drama and breakdowns.But I promise there’s a way through, and you might not even have to buy an ugly dress.The apocryphal history of the bridesmaid is as bridal decoy, to ensure demons couldn’t figure out which brightly dressed girl was the bride, and therefore no curses would be placed on her.But according to Carol McD. Wallace, author of “All Dressed in White,” the 1890s in America was when the wedding turned into a “tableau vivant.” Beginning then, bridesmaids were not just witnesses to ensure the wedding was real and consensual, but important visual components of the ceremony. They were friends, but also, as written in “Weddings: Modes, Manners & Customs” in 1928, “the lesser jewels” meant to enhance the beauty of the bride.The difficulty in being a bridesmaid comes in being at once an emotional support and a prop. You must act out your friendship in prescribed ways: wearing a certain outfit, being at particular events before the wedding and in general prioritizing a day that has nothing much to do with you. And though modern couples love to say you just have to “show up and stand there,” even that is work.The idea of saying “no” to being a bridesmaid genuinely horrifies some people.“If one of your besties asks you to be a bridesmaid, I can’t imagine saying no,” said Seri Kertziner, co-founder of Little Miss Party Planner, an event planning service focused on events surrounding weddings.Though she recognizes it’s a huge commitment of time, energy and money, she said that being asked is a symbol that you are a cherished friend — and saying no would disrespect that. But sometimes “no” needs to happen, whether in small ways like rejecting a dress or in turning down the role altogether.“I think the problem is that everything is unspoken in weddings, in a way that can be really detrimental to everybody involved,” said Maddie Eisenhart, the chief revenue officer of “A Practical Wedding.” People say yes because they are honored and excited, without realizing what is really expected.So the first step is to make those expectations, and your limitations, explicit. Instead of just saying yes, say you’re honored and ask what the bride wants from you. Someone to wear a rented dress and do nothing else? Someone to plan four different showers? Someone who can spend $10,000 on the day?From there, you can either say yes, or let the couple down easy. “I don’t think it’s unfair to anyone to say ‘I just don’t think I have space in my life to take on this responsibility, even though I’m very honored that you asked,’” Ms. Eisenhart said.No matter what, you will be spending money, so accept that at the start. But you’re more in control of your budget than you may think.“The biggest thing I would have told myself before being a bridesmaid ever was to be upfront with the bride about your financial situation,” said Jasmine Guillory, author of “The Wedding Date,” and an eight-time bridesmaid.“It probably cost me a thousand dollars for every wedding, at least,” she said. “So be upfront with the bride about what you can afford.”Wedding magazines and Pinterest usually don’t include price tags, which warps how we think a wedding should look and what’s realistic for those involved. Suddenly spending thousands of dollars on a friend’s wedding becomes “normal,” and you’re the villain for complaining. Establishing a budget is the best thing you can do to plan against that: Think of the absolute maximum you’d be willing to spend on everything (dresses, travel, hotel rooms, bachelorette gifts), and in any initial planning correspondence, say that number out loud.The same goes for planning a bachelorette party or a shower. It’s quite likely that you’ve never planned a bachelorette party before, and now you’re expected to be an expert. Ms. Kertzner suggests that, again, establishing who is paying and how much everyone can afford is key. And if the bride is insisting on something too expensive, talk to her. She very well may budge, or if she doesn’t, now you know how to say no gracefully.Ms. Guillory recalls one wedding in which the bride was white but all her bridesmaids, save her sister, were women of color. While shopping for bridesmaid dresses, the bride chose a color that the others thought would be unflattering.One bridesmaid spoke up, saying “‘I just have to say, this’ll look great on your sister but not on the rest of us.’ And the bride was like, ‘Oh! I hadn’t thought of that, I’ll change the color.’” This is not to say you won’t have to wear an unflattering color or have to take more vacation days than you’d like, but most of the time, the couple wants their friends to be happy, and are willing to make small changes to accommodate that.Still, you will not be getting everything you want.“There is a delicate balance between advocating for yourself and sucking it up a little bit,” Ms. Eisenhart said. “I’m O.K. with wearing a somewhat unflattering dress for a day for the sake of my loved ones.”Still, she said, don’t feel obligated to agree to things that push you too far outside your comfort zone, whether that’s with minor fashion choices or asking a friend with a baby or a new job to drop everything and be your wedding confidante 24/7.If you’re being pushed too far, it’s a sign that you and the couple need to have a serious talk. But having to wear silver jewelry when you wanted to wear gold isn’t that.As a bridesmaid, there will be a time during wedding planning where you need to complain, whether it’s about the groom’s family or the bachelorette destination or the 70 dresses the bride can’t choose between. This is when you should be applying the rule of “comfort in, dump out.”One of your main duties is to be an emotional support, and to not add more stress to the couple’s lives. So comfort the couple and other bridesmaids when they’re stressed, and complain to “anybody who is not in a position of being deeply enmeshed and more stressed out by your stress,” Ms. Eisenhart said.Think of it like a group of expanding rings surrounding a central point: People on the inner circle — the happy couple — can dump to the outer circle — the bridesmaids — while that outer circle should offer only comfort back in. But that outer circle of bridesmaids should feel fine dumping to a circle even further removed — say, their friends who aren’t involved in the wedding — and so on. This is called sometimes called the ring theory.“I wish brides would stop trying to find a dress ‘you can all wear again!’” Ms. Guillory said.All the dresses in my closet look like bridesmaid dresses. I will not be wearing them to cocktail parties, and that’s just fine. “You don’t wear strapless ruched chiffon on the regular,” Ms. Eisenhart said. Instead, she suggested that more couples embrace the idea of renting bridesmaid dresses, just like groomsmen rent tuxedos, whether from Rent the Runway or companies like Vow to Be Chic. Not everyone knows this is an option, so bring it up, and you might save yourself some money.Make sure you’re rested the night before, since you’re going to have to be “on” all day. Hair and makeup starts early, photographers start circling, and expect all manner of family, friends and vendors to come to you with their questions.And, of course, prepare yourself for unexpected drama.“Things always get messy at weddings, so there have been times where I’ve run interference between family members, or jumped in to pull that person out of the sight of the bride because they were doing something ridiculous,” Ms. Guillory said.Ms. Eisenhart recalled a time when the skies opened up during pre-wedding photos and the couple didn’t have a rain plan, so her husband ran out to buy a bunch of photogenic umbrellas. Things will happen, so be ready to act.To help any potential drama go down smoother, make sure everyone eats. The morning getting ready may be filled with mimosas and snacks, but try to build in time where everyone can eat an honest meal before drinking champagne and dealing with a hundred family members. “Everything looks a lot less stressful with pizza in your stomach,” Ms. Guillory said.Correction 1/16/2018: An earlier version of this article referred imprecisely to Maddie Eisenhart’s role at the website “A Practical Wedding.” While Ms. Eisenhart does edit content at the website, she is the site’s chief revenue officer.Jaya Saxena is a freelance writer and the co-author of “Basic Witches.”Advertisement