https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/22/books/review/i-really-want-to-see-you-grandma-taro-gomi.html
Grandmas and Grandpas Are a Kid’s Natural Allies in These Books - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2142
AdvertisementSupported byChildren’s BooksBy John LithgowNeedless to say, small children won’t be reading this review. It is aimed squarely at the grown-ups who buy picture books, borrow them, give them as gifts and read them aloud to children. Of all these transactions — buying, borrowing, giving and reading aloud — the one that really counts is the last. Reading a book to a small child can create a connection of exquisite intimacy, with the book itself as a vital point of contact. The quality of such a book is inextricably linked to the quality of that interaction.Such thoughts are stirred by these four new picture books featuring a loving relationship between a child and a grandparent. Leafing through each of these books, one tends to step outside the story and imagine it being read by grandparent to child. The fact that the two parties in this imagined scenario are in the earliest and latest chapters of their lives lends each book more than the usual measure of emotion.I REALLY WANT TO SEE YOU, GRANDMA (Chronicle, 40 pp., $18.99; ages 3 to 6), written and illustrated by Taro Gomi, was first published in Japan in 1979. Here it is, almost 40 years later, with its spare text translated into English. It hasn’t aged a bit.The book tells the simple story of an old woman and her granddaughter, who set off at the same time to visit each other across a broad valley. Using several modes of transportation, they twice miss each other en route but finally meet halfway for a happy picnic under a tree.The humor of this trifling anecdote is uncannily pitched to 3- to 6-year-olds, and Gomi’s witty one-dimensional illustrations drolly complement his storytelling. A mom, a grandpa, a cabby, a cat, a rampant goat and a face-licking cow expand the lively cast of characters without ever being mentioned in the text. And what fun to see Granny on a motorcycle!The author Minh Le and the illustrator Dan Santat have teamed up for DRAWN TOGETHER (Hyperion, 32 pp., $17.99; ages 4 to 8), another book whose pictures give an extra measure of help telling the story. This time a young Thai-American boy is dropped off to visit his grandfather.The two sit in awkward silence, separated by their gaping age difference and by an impenetrable language barrier (the old man’s dialogue is even scribbled in Thai). Not even a Southeast Asian action video engages the interest of the hapless lad. But when he idly plucks art supplies from his backpack, he and his granddad discover a shared enthusiasm for drawing action figures.At this point Santat’s staid, prosaic images explode into garish, kinetic life as the two create a comic-book epic featuring a ferocious dragon and two embattled heroes modeled on themselves. The heavily symbolic epic, it must be said, makes little sense to this particular grandfather, but it is charged with visual drama.The story ends with the old man and his grandson in each other’s arms, brought together by wordless affection and the power of their shared imagination. This touching lesson in empathy and family love may resonate more with a grown-up reader than a child (no child ever spoke the sentence “my grandfather surprised me by revealing a world beyond words”). Still, the book’s heart is firmly in the right place, and Santat’s illustrations of both the real-life and fantasy worlds of the two main characters are beautifully rendered.Another book also bears the weight of a grown-up message, but this one carries it a bit more gracefully. This is OCEAN MEETS SKY (Simon & Schuster, 48 pp., $17.99; ages 4 to 8), by the Fan Brothers. Sharing the roles of both author and illustrator, these two brothers have taken on the daunting challenge of introducing children to the grave fact of death.The central character in the book is a boy named Finn who lives in a house by the sea. With the gentle device of a verb tense, the authors reveal that Finn’s fisherman grandfather has recently died (he “would have been 90 years old today”). The impact of his absence is suggested by an empty chair in a darkened office. The room is cluttered with the old man’s books, tools and bric-a-brac, objects that fill Finn’s mind with fragmented memories of him.“To honor him,” Finn builds a boat on the beach, using found objects and detritus. Exhausted from his labors, he naps inside his rickety craft and, in a fantastical dream that recalls such books as “Where the Wild Things Are,” he sails it out to sea.From this point on, the book’s lovely, muted illustrations depict a world of melancholy magic. We see a giant golden fish, islands made of books and seashells, a “sea of moon jellies dancing.” Everywhere there are little reminders of Finn’s grandfather, all of them traceable to the objects in that ghostly office. A kind of spirit guide finally appears in the shape of an enormous blue whale, leading Finn through a misty universe of floating and flying memories.Finn’s mother awakens him near the end of the book. As he stands alone on the beach and takes one last look at moon and sky, he appears to contemplate for the very first time the mysteries of life and death.This is moving stuff for a grown-up, though it may be pretty heady fare for a lot of kids.Of these four fine books, the real gem is TINY, PERFECT THINGS (Compendium, 32 pp., $16.95; ages 3 to 7), written by M. H. Clark and illustrated by Madeline Kloepper, whose first name triggers associations with Ludwig Bemelmans, who may well be her stylistic muse.There’s really no story here at all. On the first page we see an old man and his rambunctious granddaughter strolling the sunny sidewalks and leafy yards of a small town. The text begins with a disarmingly simple statement: “Today we keep our eyes open for tiny, perfect things.” Each ensuing sentence has the same deadpan straightforwardness, peppered with a few fun, fractured rhymes.Grandpa and grandchild chronicle everything they find: leaf, snail, apple, crow, spider’s web, bottle cap. The verdant flora in Kloepper’s illustrations teems with hidden insects, birds and neighborhood pets. All of them reappear in a crowded two-page panoply toward the end of the book, setting the stage for a delightful game between old reader and young listener: “How many perfect things can you find?”As night falls, grandfather and grandchild return to the warm, welcoming interior of a clapboard house. Here we meet the girl’s parents. Mom, who is white, hugs her daughter; Dad, who is brown-skinned, serves up supper; Grandpa settles into a comfy chair. The scene sends off several signals that might seem too distinctly politically correct (besides tweaking gender stereotypes the family is racially mixed), but it does so with such unforced sweetness that its familiar sentiments simply warm the heart.You can almost hear the sighs of contentment from a doting grandparent and happy child.An earlier version of this article misspelled the given name of the illustrator for “Tiny, Perfect Things.” She is Madeline Kloepper, not Madeleine.John Lithgow, the actor and musician, is the author of nine children’s picture books, most recently “Never Play Music Right Next to the Zoo.”Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.Advertisement