https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/30/dining/moroccan-lamb-shoulder-steamed-recipe.html
A Steamed Lamb Shoulder, Moroccan Style - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
180
AdvertisementSupported byCity KitchenBy David TanisIf lamb chops or leg of lamb are the only parts of the beast you eat, you’re missing out.Shanks, coaxed to tenderness, are wonderful. Fans of Irish stew will tell you the neck is the best choice. Kidney, liver, tongue and heart are delectable and mild-tasting. But the most versatile cut of all is the shoulder.Shoulder of lamb has fat marbled throughout, which makes it great for braising and for burgers. But a shoulder is also delicious roasted medium-rare, especially a boneless shoulder, which can be stuffed with chopped garlic and herbs, or any other seasoning you desire. While the slices may not be as perfect as those from the hind leg, the flavor is extraordinary. And the price of a shoulder is considerably less than that of a prime-cut leg.In Morocco, lamb is found in the form of spicy simmered tagines or a whole lamb spit-roasted for hours to make the group-friendly celebratory méchoui. But many cooks there are fond of steamed lamb. Once you taste it, you will be, too.The idea is simple. Put a seasoned lamb shoulder in the basket of a large-ish steamer. (I used the steamer part of a spaghetti pot.) Keep the water in the bottom of the steamer boiling briskly for two and a half to three hours. It may sound strange, but with this technique, the meat will emerge with falling-off-the-bone succulence (even if you use a boneless shoulder), quite unlike an ordinary braise.To cut the cooking time in half, some Moroccan cooks use a pressure cooker, but I don’t mind waiting a bit longer. The lamb basically takes care of itself without much supervision.To accompany the lamb, steam some vegetables. The typical Moroccan vegetables would be carrots, turnips and zucchini. Chickpeas would not be out of place, nor would steamed little onions. Traditionally, the lamb is slathered with saffron butter before the steaming begins, but I prefer to dab the meat and vegetables with the luscious flavored butter just before serving.It is also customary to offer little bowls of salt and cumin at the table, of which I heartily approve. But a little drizzle of my harissa-like red pepper sauce makes a fine condiment, too, at least to my Yankee sensibilities. Oh, and by the way, if you need any further persuading, know that the leftover meat makes a great taco filling.Recipes: Moroccan Steamed Lamb Shoulder | More Moroccan DishescookingAdvertisement