https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/19/nyregion/from-swipes-to-taps-a-look-at-the-end-for-metrocards.html
From Swipes to Taps: A Look at the End for MetroCards - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1077
AdvertisementSupported byBy Emma G. FitzsimmonsThe Metropolitan Transportation Authority outlined plans on Monday for a new fare payment system to replace the MetroCard. A look at what New York City subway and bus riders could expect from the proposed change:Q. Why does the authority need a new system?A. The MetroCard, introduced in 1993, is obsolete, and maintaining the old infrastructure is increasingly expensive. While other cities have embraced modern payment systems, the authority has encountered setbacks in its efforts to upgrade its system. Hillary Clinton’s difficulty swiping a MetroCard on the campaign trail this month illustrated the problems many commuters experience at subway turnstiles.Q. How would the new fare payment system work?A. The exact details are still being worked out, but subway and bus riders will be able to pay the fare by tapping a bank card or smartphone on an electronic reader. The authority has solicited bids from companies to install the system, and it plans to award the contract by the end of the year.Q. When could riders start using it?A. The authority hopes to start the new payment system during summer 2018, though an independent engineering consultant cautioned on Monday that the timeline might be overly optimistic.Q. When will the transportation authority retire the MetroCard?A. Don’t throw your card away just yet. You will be able to use it for several years after the new system begins. The authority envisions a gradual phase-in similar to when the system switched from tokens to MetroCards. Subway turnstiles stopped accepting tokens in 2003. (In another recent campaign hiccup, Bernie Sanders thought he could still use a token to ride the subway.)Q. What cities have adopted modern fare payment technology?A. London has the tap-and-go Oyster card. Chicago has the Ventra card, which train and bus riders tap against a card reader. The authority hopes to learn lessons from these cities and others.Q. What if I don’t have a bank card or a smartphone?A. Officials at the authority say there will be an option for these riders, and the agency might issue its own “smart card.”Q. How much is this going to cost?A. The agency has allotted $419 million for the fare payment system in its 2015-19 capital program. The spending plan has been delayed over funding issues and is still awaiting approval from state officials.Q. What should I do with my old MetroCards?A. There will be plenty of warning with the gradual phase-in, but you could make a suit and a hat out of the yellow cards as one subway aficionado did. Or deck out your bicycle with more than 200 of the cards like another rider.Advertisement