https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/29/opinion/cohen-deal-mueller-means-for-trump.html
Opinion | What Cohen’s Deal Means for Trump - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
998
AdvertisementSupported byWe can expect even bigger bombshells — and White House threats against Mueller — in the coming weeks.By Barry Berke, Noah Bookbinder and Norman EisenMr. Berke is co-chairman of the litigation department at Kramer Levin Naftalis and Frankel. Mr. Bookbinder is executive director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. Mr. Eisen is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.A banner week for Robert Mueller’s investigation got even bigger on Thursday morning, when Michael Cohen, the former personal lawyer for President Trump, entered a plea deal and cooperation agreement with the special counsel. The deal may be among the biggest news in the nearly 18-month investigation: Not only does it open the door to more bombshells in the coming weeks, but it also ratchets up the pressure on Congress to protect Mr. Mueller.The disclosures in Mr. Cohen’s criminal information filing provide valuable detail on one piece of Mr. Mueller’s puzzle: They reveal that Mr. Cohen, the Trump Organization and Mr. Trump himself continued to pursue a Russia-related development deal into the summer of 2016 — long after Mr. Trump had essentially clinched the Republican nomination. Not only does that contradict what Mr. Cohen said in congressional testimony, but it also puts the lie to the president’s claims that he had no dealings with Russia during his candidacy. Unfortunately for the president, news of Mr. Cohen’s additional cooperation came after the president and his legal team reportedly had submitted written answers to questions posed by Mr. Mueller’s team. So did the news, earlier this week, that Mr. Mueller had caught Mr. Trump’s former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, in a series of lies, in breach of his cooperation agreement. If the president and his lawyers thought that they might sneak something by Mr. Mueller’s team, it is too late to change tactics now. Indeed, ABC reports that Mr. Mueller’s office asked Mr. Trump about the Russia project, raising the question of whether his answers correspond to the truth as Mr. Cohen is now telling it, or to what Mr. Cohen has now admitted to falsely telling Congress.Mr. Cohen’s plea agreement and accompanying cooperation are also of profound importance for what they don’t cover. When Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty to tax and campaign finance charges in August, he did so without the benefit of a cooperation agreement. Now that he has one, it is safe to assume that Mr. Mueller’s team has found his cooperation valuable and thinks it will help build a case against other targets. That cooperation will almost certainly involve topics beyond those mentioned in the documents filed Thursday. News media reports indicate that the special counsel’s office has asked Mr. Cohen about all aspects of his dealings with Russia, and any discussions that Mr. Trump had with Mr. Cohen about the possibility of a pardon. This makes sense, since any such cooperation would always involve the prosecution team fully debriefing a cooperator about any and all information that could be relevant to the investigation. Such a discussion could easily contribute to a charge of obstruction of justice against the president, which is already supported by substantial evidence. Mr. Cohen may be in a position to strengthen that case further if he can bolster the proof that Mr. Trump’s attempts to interfere were motivated by corrupt intent or if he can offer evidence that the president tried to induce him to give false testimony. To be clear: We don’t know that Mr. Cohen has these goods on the president. But you can be sure that if he does, Mr. Mueller’s team knows about them. Indeed, if Mr. Cohen were to admit that the president and Mr. Cohen or someone else worked in concert to derail the investigation — and we don’t know if that’s the case — it could give Mr. Mueller the option of seeking an indictment for conspiracy to obstruct justice and to list the president as an unindicted co-conspirator.Mr. Trump’s allies will try to dismiss the significance of Mr. Cohen’s cooperation, pointing out that he has now confessed to multiple crimes in two separate actions. But as any experienced legal practitioner knows, the government almost always relies on cooperators to make their case against their criminal cohorts. Often the best way of learning about, and proving, criminal activity is by working with those involved in that activity, unsavory as they may be. Plus, the documents filed Thursday quote extensively from emails that are almost certainly in the special counsel’s possession, which corroborates the belief that Mr. Cohen has come clean about his Russia dealings.Mr. Cohen’s plea is also significant because it represents the first charge that Mr. Mueller is known to have pursued for false statements before Congress. Though other Trump associates, like George Papadopoulos, Rick Gates and Michael Flynn, also pleaded guilty for false statements, those were all made to investigators. A multitude of other Trump associates who gave testimony before Congress — such as Roger Stone and Donald Trump Jr. — now have additional reasons to worry about Mr. Mueller’s next moves. Finally, Mr. Cohen’s cooperation continues to portend trouble for President Trump, the Trump Organization and the Trump political campaign, in conjunction with the payments Mr. Cohen arranged to women who claimed they had affairs with Mr. Trump. Mr. Cohen claims that these payments were made at Mr. Trump’s direction during the height of the 2016 campaign and that the Trump Organization reimbursed Mr. Cohen for related expenses in 2017. This also has profound implications for Mr. Trump because he is personally implicated in these deals, as are the entities that fueled his business and political success, and Mr. Cohen’s testimony could support criminal campaign finance charges against those involved.The president and his lawyers may now be lamenting the game that they have been playing for nearly a year in delaying the president’s responses to Mr. Mueller’s questions. In so doing, they have given Mr. Mueller’s investigators time to flip multiple key associates. And the president now faces a new Congress that will be more likely to take action in the event that Mr. Trump tries to shut Mr. Mueller down, and diligently pursue the issues raised in any report released by Mr. Mueller and his team.The potential risk to the president on three investigative fronts — obstruction, collusion and campaign finance — continues to grow. We know that the president has a tendency to hit back twice as hard when he is threatened. That puts the investigation at greater risk. Legislation to protect the special counsel was once again blocked by Republican leadership from a Senate vote on Wednesday. The coming omnibus spending legislation will provide a must-pass vehicle to try again to enact these protections, and we hope the supporters of Mr. Mueller, and of democracy and accountability, on both sides of the aisle will seize the moment. The course of justice may depend on it.Barry Berke is co-chairman of the litigation department at Kramer Levin Naftalis and Frankel, where he is a partner specializing in white-collar criminal defense. Noah Bookbinder is executive director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington and a former federal corruption prosecutor. Norman Eisen is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, chairman of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, and author of “The Last Palace: Europe’s Turbulent Century in Five Lives and One Legendary House.” Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement