https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/movies/nyc-this-weekend-film-series.html
6 Film Series to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
477
AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben KenigsbergOur guide to film series and special screenings happening this weekend and in the week ahead. All our movie reviews are at nytimes.com/reviews/movies.ART OF THE REAL at the Film Society of Lincoln Center (through April 28). Few movies in this annual showcase can be comfortably described as “documentaries” — the goal is to broaden perceptions of what nonfiction filmmaking is and can do. Miko Revereza’s “No Data Plan” (on Friday), for instance, has a hallucinatory quality: Footage of train travel across the United States is used to emphasize the paranoia felt by undocumented immigrants living in America. A major highlight of this year’s edition is said to be the tribute to the Lebanese filmmaker Jocelyne Saab, who died in January. The essay films that constitute her Beirut trilogy (on April 28) reflect on life in that city in the midst of the Lebanese civil war.212-875-5601, filmlinc.orgDOCUMENTARY IN DIALOGUE: WERNER HERZOG at Anthology Film Archives (through April 28). It may be the case that Herzog is eventually better known for his documentaries than his fiction features; they are never simple chronicles of events, but often use a subject to ponder humanity’s insignificance in the vastness of nature and the cosmos. Anthology’s series pairs various Herzog films with other documentaries that highlight the eccentricities of his approach. Herzog’s capital-punishment documentary, “Into the Abyss,” will play back-to-back with the early-1960s documentary “The Chair,” which captures events leading up to a parole hearing for the death-row inmate Paul Crump. Both movies show on Saturday and April 27, and Jill Drew, the daughter-in-law of Robert Drew, a director of “The Chair,” will appear at Saturday’s screening.212-505-5181, anthologyfilmarchives.orgNELSON PEREIRA DOS SANTOS at the Metrograph (April 19-28). Credited as a founder of the Cinema Novo movement, this Brazilian director (1928-2018) and his politically pointed films are perhaps not as frequently revived in New York as they should be. The Metrograph’s retrospective begins with the satire “How Tasty Was My Little Frenchman” (on Friday, Saturday and Monday), inspired by a 16th-century memoir of European colonialism, in which a Frenchman is taken in by an island of cannibals; it continues with dos Santos’s debut feature, “Rio 40 Degrees” (on Friday, Sunday and Tuesday), a cross-section of life in Rio de Janeiro.212-660-0312, metrograph.com[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]SEE IT BIG! ACTION at the Museum of the Moving Image (April 19-July 7). The museum gets a jump on summer blockbusters with this series of much-loved pulse-pounders, which kicks off this weekend with Steven Spielberg’s “Raiders of the Lost Ark” (on Friday and Saturday) and some types of movies to which it owes a debt. Spielberg has expressed his admiration for Akira Kurosawa, whose “Seven Samurai” screens on Sunday. “Anne of the Indies” (on Saturday), a highlight of winter’s Tourneur retrospective at the Film Society of Lincoln Center, is a more straightforward B-level swashbuckler, with Jean Peters as a pirate (a profession dominated by men, to put it mildly) and some extremely lush Technicolor cinematography.718-784-0077, movingimage.usTRILOGIES at Film Forum (April 19-May 16). Strict continuity is optional for the movies in this collection, which have one main attribute in common: There are three of each. The “Godfather” trilogy (showing throughout April) and Satyajit Ray’s Apu series (at the end of April and in May) invite audiences to follow generation-spanning sagas. Other trilogies — Krzysztof Kieslowski’s “three colors” movies (on April 30), Hou Hsiao-Hsien’s youth films from “A Summer at Grandpa’s” (on May 4) through “Dust in the Wind” (on May 5), John Ford’s cavalry westerns (on May 8 and 11) — have only loose thematic links. In some cases, they’ve become trilogies with the benefit of hindsight.212-727-8110, filmforum.orgWILD THINGS: THE FEROCIOUS FILMS OF NELLY KAPLAN at the Quad Cinema (through April 25). Writing about this Argentine-French director’s debut feature, “A Very Curious Girl,” earlier this month, J. Hoberman described it in The New York Times as “a one-time staple of women’s film festivals that never quite became a classic.” The opportunity for a rediscovery continues as this Kaplan retrospective enters its second week with her later features — most, if not all, overlooked in the United States. One is “Velvet Paws” (on Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday), which stars Bernadette Lafont (the erstwhile very curious girl) as a psychic who receives a visit from a massage therapist (Caroline Sihol), seeking closure on her husband’s death. They soon discover that he is not only alive, but also married to both of them.212-255-2243, quadcinema.comAdvertisement