https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/08/business/marriott-hotel-reward-program-members.html
Marriott’s Merger of Hotel Rewards Programs Tests Members’ Loyalty - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1415
AdvertisementSupported byBy Martha C. WhiteBen Greenstein didn’t expect to spend more than four hours on the phone over three days just to redeem points for a hotel booking in Boston.But Mr. Greenstein, an entrepreneur from Baltimore who travels frequently for work, got caught in the not-so-smooth merger in August of Marriott International’s traveler rewards program with the Starwood Preferred Guest and Ritz-Carlton Rewards loyalty programs.“Prior to this merger, it was never like that,” said Mr. Greenstein, a member of Starwood’s SPG program. When he went online, he said, he found that he was not the only one who couldn’t get help with his account after the merger. “What really bugged me more than anything else was when I went to Facebook and looked on the SPG page and saw how many people were having that problem,” he said.Irate members posted to complain they were unable to log in to their profiles or merge their accounts, or discovered that their accounts were missing points or nights counting toward elite status. Those who called Marriott found themselves on the phone for long stretches before they could speak to a representative, and then that the agents were unable to fix the glitches immediately.“I used to call and within 30 seconds they’d pick up the phone,” said John Metallo, a retired school administrator and elite SPG member who said he preferred to book rooms over the phone rather than electronically. “It was almost like a concierge service. That was one of the nice things about the program.”He, too, said it had taken multiple days and hours on hold to rectify an error that erased about 35,000 points from his balance of around 200,000.Although Marriott completed its purchase of Starwood Hotels & Resorts, which includes brands like W, Westin and Sheraton, in 2016, it had until this summer retained the loyalty programs as three separate entities. Its plan was to merge the three in a single, seamless technological transition. That was not what happened.“Bringing that technology together was a very challenging undertaking,” said David Flueck, Marriott’s senior vice president for global loyalty. The task, which created a loyalty program with more than 110 million members, took nearly two years, he said, and entailed writing some 20 million new lines of computer code.“We ended up bringing over about four billion records from the Starwood technology systems,” Mr. Flueck said. He described the merger as 99.9 percent successful, though he acknowledged that it still left millions of customer records in limbo, some for weeks before they were resolved.“It did take us a couple of weeks to figure out why those records didn’t come over as they should have and solve it,” he said. “The challenge there for us is these are very complex questions to answer.”Given the scope of the task, there were almost bound to be some hiccups, loyalty program technology experts say. Some suggested the problems might have been mitigated if Marriott had run a test on a small group of customers before rolling out the merger to everyone at once.“I don’t think that they anticipated having as many problems as they did,” said Flo Lugli, principal of Navesink Advisory Group, a travel technology consulting firm. “That’s clear from the way the call centers were just inundated.”She added, “I don’t know if they just didn’t anticipate the angst of the SPG members.”Some loyalty program experts pointed to airline mergers and the lessons drawn from those frequent flier program combinations.“My sense is that the US Air-American one actually went very smoothly and was also very slow and methodical,” said Mark Haley, managing partner at the Prism Partnership, a hospitality consulting firm. “I think some of the others were done in more of a Big Bang fashion and had more impact on the traveler. I think United-Continental had some real issues.”“Loyalty is a big business, but also a small enough business that consolidations of this magnitude don’t happen very often,” Mr. Haley said.Kenneth Sweet, who teaches management at Texas A & M University in San Antonio and spends more than 100 nights a year in Marriott hotels, said that he appreciated the greater variety of hotels in the merged program, but that interactions with the company had been frustrating.“If they hadn’t announced they were fully integrated, it’s about what I would have expected,” he said.For SPG loyalists, the long wait for a resolution seemed to confirm their fears that being absorbed by the hotel behemoth would mean the elimination of perks and personalized customer service that were hallmarks of their previous loyalty program.“Typically, I’ve always been pleased with the Starwood level of customer service,” said Shane Farmer, who estimated that he used to spend 60 nights a year in Starwood hotels for his job in the health care industry. “They’re always polite and well versed in the policies. I haven’t experienced any of that since the merger.”Mr. Farmer said he had run into complications trying to merge his Marriott Rewards and SPG accounts and spent more than an hour on hold on a dedicated customer service line for platinum-level members.“It was a stark change when Starwood had the platinum line and they answered on the first or second ring,” he said.Nor were former Starwood members the only ones caught up. Some elite members of Marriott Rewards said they, too, felt lost in the shuffle over the merger.Mr. Sweet, the professor, said he had encountered long waits on Marriott’s elite reservations line and agents unable to answer questions about his stays.“Did they actually think they were turnkey ready and this was going to be seamless?” he asked. “I assume these are things that will work themselves out, but they made an artificial expectation for themselves.”In advance of the official merger on Aug. 18, Marriott said, it added customer service representatives and trained some of its existing call center workers to handle an expected influx of calls. Since then, the company said, it has added 225 “loyalty care associates” and will add more if demand warrants it. It said it had also added 200 workers to help answer merger-related emails.“The most important thing to me was the Platinum phone reservations line,” said Corey Loeffelholz, who spends as many as 160 nights a year away from his home in Wisconsin for his job at a technology company.Being able to reach a live agent right away was a big advantage if he was trying to make a reservation while rushing through an airport, he said. “That was the level of service I’d come to expect from Marriott and it was an advantage over other chains.”Mr. Loeffelholz said being routed to an automated phone tree had the potential to be a deal-breaker. “That was my No. 1 benefit. Now, I rarely get straight through to people,” he said.A Marriott spokesman said that voice-activated automated call routing on its elite line was intended to help get customers’ questions answered more quickly, and that callers still have the option of saying “agent” to reach a customer service representative. The company said its recently added enhancements had cut wait times on the elite line by nearly 75 percent since Aug. 24.Balancing efficiency with customer satisfaction is a needle Marriott will have to thread carefully to keep elite-status guests happy, said Chekitan Dev, a professor of marketing and branding at Cornell University’s School of Hotel Administration. High-spending travelers expect to be catered to, he said, and any reduction in the perception that elite status confers an elevated level of personal service could erode loyalty.“People expected a certain amount of customer service and personalization,” he said.While there were scattered claims across social media and on frequent-traveler message boards of rooms and affiliated credit cards being canceled out of frustration, conversations with hotel owners indicate that these threats are not being carried out on a wide scale, said Michael Bellisario, a vice president and senior analyst at Robert W. Baird & Company, a financial services company that buys and sells Marriott stock.“So far, no one’s seen a material change in direct bookings,” he said, adding that he didn’t anticipate mass defections. “You get used to certain perks. No one likes change. I feel like there’s always that initial grumble factor.”Advertisement