https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/27/books/review/rebecca-traister-good-and-mad-soraya-chemaly-rage-becomes-her.html
The Power of Enraged Women - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2964
AdvertisementSupported byNonfictionBy Elaine BlairGOOD AND MAD The Revolutionary Power of Women’s Anger By Rebecca Traister 284 pp. Simon & Schuster. $27.RAGE BECOMES HER The Power of Women’s Anger By Soraya Chemaly 392 pp. Atria. $27.Revolutionary power is ascribed to many cultural and commercial products, but the journalist Rebecca Traister means the subtitle of her book “Good and Mad: The Revolutionary Power of Women’s Anger” in the old-fashioned sense: “This is about the specific nexus of women’s anger and American politics, about how the particular dissatisfactions and resentments of America’s women have often ignited movements for social change and progress.” In her rousing look at the political uses of this supposedly unfeminine emotion, Traister, a columnist for New York magazine and the author of two previous books on women and politics, cites the 18th-century slave Elizabeth Freeman, whose suit for freedom in the Massachusetts courts — based on the rhetoric of inalienable rights that she overheard being discussed by her owners — led to that state’s outlawing of slavery; the girls working the Lowell mills, whose organized walkouts would inspire a larger labor movement; Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton; Frances Willard and Carrie Nation; Rosa Parks, Fannie Lou Hamer, Florynce Kennedy, Gloria Steinem and Andrea Dworkin, as well as many less famous women who were part of the abolition, suffrage, temperance, labor, civil rights and feminist movements. What they all have in common is that at some point they found they could no longer tolerate the conditions under which they lived. In other words, they got mad.[ Rebecca Traister talked to The Times about women’s anger. Read the interview here. ]Though their efforts obviously involved much more than feeling angry, Traister spotlights the one emotion that, she contends, often gets underplayed in public discussions of history’s female activists, including the ones we now hold up as heroes. Anger, she writes, “has rarely been acknowledged as righteous and patriotic when it has originated with women, though women have often taken pains to mimic or reference the language and sentiments of America’s founding while making their own angry demands for liberty, independence and equality.”“Anger” can mean several different things for the purposes of the book: It’s a spontaneous emotional response to mistreatment, a motivating force for political action, an affect for which women are disproportionately criticized and penalized and an important aspect of public political expression that can be deployed in various ways. Indeed, a clearer taxonomy might have been helpful, given that Carrie Nation’s hatchet-swinging attacks on saloons during the temperance movement are a different kind of angry expression from Rosa Parks’s steady refusal to leave her seat, and both are different still from the teenage girl who survived the Parkland shooting and tweeted “I don’t want your condolences you [expletive] [expletive],” in response to Trump.The movement Traister spends most of the book analyzing is the one currently unfolding, the wave of female-led, progressive activism that began with Black Lives Matter, swelled after Trump’s election and produced a major shift in the cultural consensus on sexual harassment through #MeToo. Traister analyzes media coverage of the election and the women’s marches. She interviews Second Wave leaders, current politicians and activists, and a group of liberal suburban women who’ve just started pounding the pavement in Southern red states. She reviews the increased interest in feminism over the last 10 years, and describes a professional world in which, until 2016, women quietly hoped to overturn stereotypes and beat sexism by working hard and being charming (she counts herself among them). For such women — decently compensated, largely white and benefiting in many respects from the status quo — the election of Trump was a moment of bitter disillusionment leading perhaps to the first display of raw fury and political activism of their lives. For many women of color, and for many women who are immigrants, or poor, Trump’s victory was both more directly threatening and less surprising. “Among African-American women, there’s been a long consistency of action,” the Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams tells Traister. “What you’re seeing in the suburbs is now a version of that.” The various coalitions that have formed since the election have occasionally been fractious, but even more so they have been energized and highly effective in organizing and turning out the vote for a historically high number of female Democratic Party candidates. The unprecedented, if cautious, sense of solidarity among women (long an elusive ideal in a population sharply divided by class and race) is almost as important a theme in the book as anger itself.[ Read this Opinion essay by Rebecca Traister on fury as a political weapon. ]The same could be said of Soraya Chemaly’s book, “Rage Becomes Her: The Power of Women’s Anger,” a biting polemic that points to the pressures that women in sexist society face in common, even as those pressures are borne differently and unequally in different communities. Chemaly, a longtime writer and feminist activist, notes that girls and women are commonly socialized to suppress their anger, which is a shame because a ready arsenal of rage and invective comes in handy when you’re the subordinated gender: “By effectively severing anger from ‘good womanhood,’ we choose to sever girls and women from the emotion that best protects us against danger and injustice.”Despite its title, Chemaly’s book is not so much about anger as about all the disparities that might — and should — make women angry: disproportionate poverty, wage gaps, discrimination, harassment, condescension and perhaps above all the high rates of violence against women (domestic, sexual and otherwise) with which we have yet to fully reckon. “Most of us learn to think that boys and men are the world’s risk takers,” she writes, “but that is only because we don’t seriously address the risks women must take as they navigate boys and men. We take risks when we post our profiles on dating websites and meet up with strangers. We take risks when we can’t pay for gyms (in lieu of exercising outside), taxis or car services, and other pricey ‘safety’ measures. We take risks every time we get pregnant. We take risks when we report sexual harassment, assault and domestic violence. We take risks when we go to the police. … We are experts at risk-taking.”Chemaly cites many studies showing anti-female bias on all these fronts. The data comes flying at the reader so quickly that it can be hard to absorb. But it’s a reminder of how much social science research has been done in the last few decades on the subject of gender-based (as well as racial) discrimination, showing again and again that unconscious bias regularly shapes decision-making even when all parties are acting in good faith.Written with energy and conviction, these celebrations of the galvanic possibilities of anger make for galvanizing reading. While their positive view of political anger makes sense within the context of social justice movements, I did wish for an accounting of anger that could also take in what’s happening just outside the frame. There is obviously a lot of anger on the right, including among the majority of white women who voted for Trump — a fact that both authors acknowledge without letting it trouble their emphasis on women’s political anger as a specifically progressive force. Conservative radio and television hosts have spent decades stoking their audience’s fury at liberals, immigrants and feminists to create unlikely support for a batch of policies (more pollution, fewer consumer protections) that defy any common-sense standard of public benefit. More recently, mainstream Democratic Party liberalism has come in for much criticism on the left, and with it the supposedly moderation-loving liberal temperament. Angry expressions of ethno-nationalism are rising in many parts of the world, while angry expressions of misogyny are abloom on social media.Traister and Chemaly embrace feminist anger at a time when anger is the widespread mood of the moment. (It’s also the political style of the moment, and both authors might have paid more consistent attention to the distinctions between anger as a felt emotion and angry expression as a political tactic — categories that may overlap in complex ways but don’t always do so.) Looking around at the various angry constituencies, it’s hard to draw conclusions about what kind of voter or citizen or activist anger creates. Is an angry voter a skeptic who sees through politicians’ lies, or a pawn in the hands of moneyed interests? Does the angry citizen have a keen sense of justice, or a propensity to join mobs? Is the anger felt by a crowd marching for immigrants’ rights categorically different from the anger of a crowd marching against immigration? These questions may be outside the scope of the books, but they seem all the more pressing in light of Traister’s and Chemaly’s revelations.Elaine Blair is a regular contributor to The New York Review of Books.Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.Advertisement