https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/dining/le-coucou-review.html
Le Coucou Pays Rich Homage to Old-School French Cuisine - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2041
AdvertisementSupported byRestaurant Review11 PhotosView Slide Show ›When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Pete WellsNew York City cannot compete with Los Angeles’s patchwork quilt of cuisines, Northern California’s sainted ingredients, New Orleans’s discerning and passionate diners. What sets New York’s restaurant culture apart is that it never quite shakes the past and has never fully severed its ties to Europe.This is why New York can seem to be stuck in the last century, but it also explains its unusual receptivity to news from across the Atlantic. (No American city has been as fast to take up natural wines or the New Nordic mode.) With Le Coucou, this attention to Europe and attachment to the past come together in ways that are creative and fresh.The chef, Daniel Rose, runs a restaurant in Paris called Spring, but he’s from Chicago. He has said that his old-guard French menu is meant in part as a homage to Lutèce, a restaurant in Manhattan that he never visited. (It closed 12 years ago.) In other words, a chef who knows a lot about what actual French people are eating in 2016 has decided to summon a long-closed Manhattan restaurant that gave many Americans their ideas about French cuisine in the last four decades of the 20th century.This idea would make no sense anywhere but New York. It may not make sense here, either, but of all the restaurants to open in the city over the last year, Le Coucou would be my first pick for visitors from out of town who wanted a meal they couldn’t have back home.Not that it’s a tourist restaurant. Locals have been pouring through the doors at the south end of Lafayette Street since they opened, in the last week of spring, and reservations are scarce unless you want to eat before 6 p.m. or after 9:30. A lot of the love is due to Mr. Rose’s decision to bring back the long-gone high style of French cuisine.At Spring, his first restaurant in Paris, he put market produce in the foreground, following the seasons and his own contemporary impulses. Le Coucou’s cooking is more informed by old-school traditions and focused on animal parts, like the bands of fried tripe, crunchy on the outside and wonderfully creamy within. Or the eel fried in a sheath of rye batter, sauced with a vinaigrette that has a subtle and somehow very French flavor of curry.Much of the cooking revolves around glossy, spoon-coating, cream- and butter-reinforced sauces that some younger diners have never tasted. These sauces aren’t remotely heavy or deadening, two of the charges hurled at them when they were led to the guillotines by the Robespierres of nouvelle cuisine.In fact, they are so dynamic, the contours of their flavors so precise and rewarding, that smart diners lick the sauces from the heavy, scrolled, silver-plated tablespoon set to the right of the gold-rimmed plates, waiting for just this purpose.When the bourride arrived, I used the tablespoon to drink the shellfish fumet that a server had ladled from a copper sauté pan over a fillet of black sea bass in a soup bowl. I used it again to stir the smooth yellow aioli into the fumet, and again to taste the garlic-ridden aioli on its own. There were clams and a prawn in the sauté pan, too, and they were excellent. But the body and balance of the fumet were so right that it became the point of the dish; the shellfish were mere pretext.It’s no accident that after Americans swore off rich sauces, they began to hunger for fatty cuts like pork butt and rib-eye. But you can see the point of the old high style when you eat Le Coucou’s beef filet. The lean, rosy slices taste pure and clean; the decadence is supplied by ovals of soft beef marrow and by the marrow jus spooned over the meat.A side dish that comes with the beef is a rare mismatch: thin, crunchy slices of potatoes boulangère that don’t absorb the juices of the braised oxtail underneath.A bulging lobe of sweetbreads, scored with a knife and seared in a pan, is wonderful with its surrounding sauce, but you will also want to get some of that lively union of cream, white wine, tomatoes and fresh, minty tarragon on its own. You’ll also need to taste the brandy and lobster in the foamy sauce Américaine both with and without the delicate white mound of a pike quenelle.After eating that dish, a Francophile friend pronounced, “Downtown finally has its La Grenouille.” True enough, but I’d add that the food coming out of Le Coucou’s kitchen is more focused, the ingredients are finer, and the service is more tuned in. As for the wine list constructed by Aaron Thorp, it is better in every way you can name.Mr. Rose and his partner, Stephen Starr, allow themselves a couple of stagy visual references to those old French restaurants. The menu is written in French, although there are English subtitles. The cooks all wear tall white toques, and for many customers, Le Coucou will probably be the first place they’ve seen that piece of headgear outside children’s books.For the most part, though, Le Coucou carefully avoids the things that people found intimidating about the old Le and La restaurants. Mr. Rose wears a black shirt and no toque; his modern outfit sets the tone for the dining room.To the right of the front door is an intimate, soft-focus cocktail alcove that doubles as a waiting area. There are no seats at the bar, which is too bad if you want to eat by yourself, but which also gives the room a little bit of romance. The space opens up as you enter the dining room, with chandeliers that look like concentric rings of votive candles suspended above the white tablecloths, each of which is set with a single white taper.What Le Coucou achieves in its look and feel is impressive. It has an elegance that is well outside the everyday rumble of New York life but that doesn’t have any of the heaviness in décor or the off-putting reserve that nobody really misses from the old days.The only place where Le Coucou falls slightly on the wrong side of the line between casual and formal is in Daniel Skurnick’s desserts. They’re lovely, but some seem too relaxed after the rigorously elegant main courses.There’s a roasted pear stuffed with vanilla ice cream standing gracefully upright amid candied almonds, the golden folds of its skin clinging to it like a silk shawl. But other desserts, like the rice pudding with chopped pistachios or the chocolate mousse under leafy chocolate shavings, have a slouching, stuff-in-a-bowl informality that seems to belong in a wine bar. (A wine-bar annex to Le Coucou isn’t a bad idea, by the way.)One night, I sat next to two Parisian women who said they were regulars at Spring. A French-speaking waiter appeared and engaged them in a long deliberation about the cheese course. They sent over their cheese, we shared our desserts, and then I slipped outside with them while they lit up their Gauloises.“This is very different from Spring,” one said. “But it makes sense in New York.”When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.This information was last updated on Nov. 27, 2018Reservations powered by OpenTableEMAIL: petewells@nytimes.com And follow Pete Wells on Twitter: @pete_wells.Advertisement