http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/27/nyregion/plan-expedited-for-affordable-units-at-atlantic-yards-near-downtown-brooklyn.html
Plan Expedited for Affordable Housing Near Barclays Center in Brooklyn - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2014
AdvertisementSupported byBy Charles V. BagliAfter 11 years of delays, lawsuits and a recession, the developer behind the Atlantic Yards project has agreed to greatly accelerate the construction of affordable housing in a deal that involved delicate negotiations with state officials, the de Blasio administration and a coalition of community groups.Atlantic Yards, one of the largest building projects in recent New York history, was supposed to feature a basketball arena as a centerpiece and include thousands of apartments affordable to poor, working- and middle-class families who were being shut out of a rapidly gentrifying area near Downtown Brooklyn.But while the $1 billion arena, Barclays Center, opened to acclaim in September 2012, not one apartment building has been built — a bitter disappointment for some residents who have watched rents soar beyond their reach.Now, the developer, Forest City Ratner, facing pressure from public officials and community groups, has signed a formal agreement with the state, which oversees the project, to put housing construction into high gear and finish 2,250 affordable apartments by 2025, 10 years ahead of the current schedule.“New York State is delivering a deal that will ensure this vital housing is built quickly and efficiently and that the community is engaged in every step of the project,” Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Thursday. “This agreement is a win for the state and most importantly Brooklyn residents who will finally begin to see affordable buildings being constructed in their neighborhoods.”Under the agreement, the next two residential buildings — a total of 600 units — will be entirely affordable housing. If the developer fails to begin construction within the next year, it must pay what would essentially be a fine of up to $5 million.“We are determined to jump-start affordable housing at Atlantic Yards,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Thursday. “The agreement means two 100 percent affordable buildings will go in the ground starting next year, with units serving a more diverse range of families. And what’s remarkable is that we’ve secured nearly twice as many affordable units for our city investment.”The unusual deal to expedite construction sprang from Mr. Cuomo’s desire to impose a timeline on a long-sputtering project sponsored by New York State, and Mayor de Blasio’s eagerness to make significant progress on his vow to create 200,000 units of affordable housing.But another key element was a deep-pocketed Chinese company eager to jump into New York’s booming real estate market. Forest City Ratner is completing a partnership agreement this week with the company, Greenland Holding Group, that represents the group’s first investment in New York and one that will inject tens of millions in fresh capital into the project.This year, Greenland executives, who are buying a 70 percent stake in the project, said publicly that they wanted to complete Atlantic Yards in eight years. The company will pay about $200 million for its stake in the project and cover 70 percent of future costs.On Friday, the state’s economic development authority, which is overseeing the project, is expected to formally approve the new timetable and hefty financial penalties if the developer fails to meet the agreed-upon goals.The authority will also establish a 14-member board responsible for ensuring compliance with the agreement, and for monitoring the mitigation of community impacts during the construction period. Its members will be appointed by the governor, the mayor, elected officials and the Brooklyn borough president.MaryAnne Gilmartin, the president of Forest City Ratner, said the agreement allowed her company to set the construction schedule and move forward with “the final stages of Atlantic Yards.”“It is an alignment that says Atlantic Yards will live up to the promises that we’ve worked hard to achieve,” she said.She added that Forest City has had to deal with a variety of obstacles, “including the Great Recession and numerous lawsuits.” Forest City has already spent over $525 million on the residential portion of the project, which involves building a new Long Island Rail Road storage yard and building a platform overhead for apartment towers.The agreement would avert another lawsuit against the project from seven community-based organizations and several individuals. Their concerns have been incorporated into the agreement, and they have signed a covenant with state officials not to file a suit as long as the agreement is formally approved.The groups had argued that the neighborhood was changing so rapidly that many of the people who needed the affordable housing promised by Atlantic Yards would be gone by the time it was built under the old timetable, by 2035.“This project has been crying out for real public accountability, and the community has been crying out for affordable housing now,” said Michelle de la Uz, executive director of the Fifth Avenue Committee, one of the groups that signed the covenant. “I’m heartened that everyone realized you can’t have one without the other as part of realizing Atlantic Yards’ full promise.”The new agreement specifies that a portion of affordable units would be for low-income families of four that make $48,000 or less, moderate-income families earning up to $88,000 a year, and middle-income families earning up to $104,000.Daron Hudson, whose family has lived in the area since the 1950s, said the agreement was particularly important for people like himself. He said he liked the idea of a having an arena in his backyard and the promise of new housing. But the Atlantic Yards project has also sped up the area’s transformation into a higher-priced enclave.Mr. Hudson, a teacher’s aide, lives in a one-bedroom apartment with his partner and his young daughter. He has scoured the neighborhood for two years, unable to find a two-bedroom apartment they could afford.“The neighborhood has changed for the good,” said Mr. Hudson, who would have been a plaintiff in the lawsuit. “But it’s created difficulties for a lot of families who have lived here. Rents have soared drastically over the past five years. Some people have moved away. But we have a right to live in this community like anyone else.”Progress on Atlantic Yards’ first residential tower — a modular building next to the arena with 363 apartments, including 181 affordable units — has been painfully slow. It started in December 2012, and Forest City expects to finish late next year.But under the new agreement, everything is supposed to move more swiftly. The next building must begin construction by Dec. 30, at Dean Street and Carlton Avenue, following by a second tower next to the arena.Forest City also expects to begin construction on two luxury condominium towers by December and July.In negotiations with Forest City, Deputy Mayor Alicia Glen agreed to provide a cash subsidy of $11.75 million for each of those buildings, in exchange for 600 units of affordable housing.That deal represents a major improvement on Atlantic Yards’ first, still uncompleted building, Ms. Glen said. In that instance, she said, the Bloomberg administration invested $11.6 million for only 182 units of affordable housing.“We’ve fundamentally changed how developers are working with the city to deliver affordable housing,” she said.An earlier version of this article contained several errors. The executive director of the Fifth Avenue Committee is Michelle de la Uz, not Michele. People accompanying Ms. de la Uz in a photo were from the coalition Brooklyn Speaks, not from the Fifth Avenue Committee. Because of an editing error, the article also incorrectly rendered the given name of the president of Forest City Ratner. She is MaryAnne Gilmartin, not Maryanne.Advertisement