https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/16/books/review/the-deluge-by-adam-tooze.html
‘The Deluge,’ by Adam Tooze - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2307
AdvertisementSupported byWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Gary J. BassThe defining political fact of the modern world is American power. The supremacy of the American colossus is still so imposing, it leaves former rivals scrambling for labels beyond “superpower”: The former French foreign minister Hubert Védrine called the United States the hyperpuissance, while for the German commentator Josef Joffe, it was the überpower. This American hegemony is all the more striking given how little the United States mattered to world politics over a century ago. For anyone seeking to understand how American predominance was achieved in the years after World War I, and why it catastrophically failed to keep the hard-won peace, Adam Tooze has written an essential book. Epic in scope, boldly argumentative, deftly interweaving military and economic narratives, “The Deluge” is splendid interpretive history.Rather than starting at a conventional moment like the outbreak of World War I, Tooze begins midstream in 1916 — the year of the gory battles of Verdun and the Somme, but also the year when the economic output of the United States exceeded that of the British Empire. From then until today, writes Tooze, a professor of history at Yale, “American economic might would be the decisive factor in the shaping of the world order.” The emerging capitalist titan could convert its financial and industrial strength into military might — as Woodrow Wilson snapped about Britain in 1916, “Let us build a navy bigger than hers and do what we please.”While leaving the United States comparatively unscathed, the Great War devastated and radicalized European societies. It brought nightmare glimpses of future enormities, as when Erich Ludendorff, a top German general, planned in 1918 to uproot some two million people from annexed Polish territory, neutralizing its Jewish population and making them emigrate. That same year, Trotsky declared that “violence is a holy and historically progressive force,” and Lenin vowed to establish “concentration camps” for “unreliable elements.”Still, after the guns fell silent, there were real reasons to hope the victorious liberal powers could establish a collective security system and stabilize the global economy. Britain sought to use the League of Nations to solidify an American partnership, while France wanted to see “justice fortified” through a historic democratic alignment with Britain and the United States. There were flickering American hopes for democracy in revolutionary Russia, although they were soon extinguished by the Bolsheviks. In Japan, for all the clout of the imperialists, there were also liberals and constitutionalists working in a nascent parliamentary system who temporarily restrained the militarists who would later wreak such devastation across Asia. And in Germany itself, the majority democratic parties — which today constitute the bedrock of the pacifist Federal Republic — pressed for a negotiated end to the war, then stood up against German fascists and Communists.So Tooze narrates the tumultuous and violent 1920s as a heartbreakingly avoidable tragedy, with the big democracies needlessly squandering their supremacy. Above all, grand liberal projects would never succeed without American engagement. With the United States emerging exponentially more powerful from the war, France and Britain would need its support to deter possible new German aggression. Even when the United States refused to assert itself, Tooze argues, the interwar order “was defined in large part by the absent presence of its most defining element — the new power of the United States.” America did not merely fail to join the League of Nations, but by 1924 declared it potentially hostile while failing to give France a firm security guarantee.The central figure of the period is Woodrow Wilson, who appears here as an exasperating but tough-minded visionary. For all his pieties, he was unflinching about seeking American dominance. Contrary to the image of Wilson as an unheeding fantasist, Tooze paints him as deeply influenced by Edmund Burke, decrying the French Revolution and hoping instead for gradual and generational change. Even Wilson’s sweeping Fourteen Points appear here as reflections of his “conservative evolutionary liberalism.” He doubted that Germany could sustain democracy and disdained its brave liberal leaders as “nondescript creatures.” And he was a consummate bigot, worrying that Japan’s formidable rise while Europe was tearing itself apart threatened “white supremacy on this planet.”The Americans, declaring themselves foes of militarism and imperialism, saw the world in a different light from established powers like Britain and France or upstarts like Germany and Japan. Wilson, in Tooze’s telling, was dedicated not just to the peacemaking League of Nations, but also to “American hegemony against all shades of European and Japanese imperialism.” Standing aloof from the colonialists on both sides, disgustedly scorning the Great War as a “quarrel to settle economic rivalries between Germany and England,” Wilson had only belatedly been jerked into the fighting by Germany’s disastrous policy of unrestricted submarine warfare. Before and after the war, he famously sought an evenhanded “peace without victory.”To this day, the Treaty of Versailles evokes a ruinously bungled peace, a dire example consciously avoided by later leaders as varied as Henry Stimson and Indira Gandhi. But rather than simply dismissing the treaty as harshly punitive to Germany, Tooze maintains that most of its problems stemmed from its awkward respect for German national sovereignty, unlike prior European peace settlements. As bitterly as many Germans resented the treaty’s restrictions and reparations, they were, he suggests, merely being subjected to a more modern type of limited sovereignty dawning across Europe. It’s a particular virtue of “The Deluge” that it recounts a world crisis, spiraling from Europe to Asia, with oppressive empires buckling in India, Africa and the Middle East. Obviously mindful of today’s rising great power, Tooze suggests that China, then a fledgling and fractious republic, might have aligned itself with the United States in World War I. But when China abandoned its neutrality and spurned Germany in 1917, Wilson offered a disappointingly meek response, convincing a predatory Japan that America could be surprisingly easily bullied. Tooze perceptively notes that this reveals a general tendency by Wilson to raise democratic hopes and then dash them. Far from seeing the rise of fascism as inevitable, Tooze argues provocatively that the potential “future dominance of American capitalist democracy” was “the common factor impelling Hitler, Stalin, the Italian Fascists and their Japanese counterparts to such radical action.” But while this allows an appealing synthesis of these disparate extremisms, you would hardly register from “The Deluge” how much Hitler’s racial worldview was fixated obsessively on conquering eastern Lebens­raum in the “Judeo-Bolshevik” Soviet Union. That was highlighted powerfully in Tooze’s previous book, “The Wages of Destruction,” a pioneering study of the genocidal Nazi economy, which also made clear that Hitler feared American economic power for fundamentally anti-Semitic reasons: In his feverish mind, American dominance would mean the enslavement of Germany by a global Jewish conspiracy. When democratic hopes for a perpetual peace inevitably withered, the fascists and totalitarians seized their fatal chance. As World War I was drawing to a close in 1918, Wilson said he was “thinking now only of putting the United States into a position of strength and justice. I am now playing for 100 years hence.” With only a few years to go until then, we are still reckoning with the awful aftershocks of that era’s failures. THE DELUGEThe Great War, America and the Remaking of the Global Order, 1916-1931By Adam ToozeIllustrated. 644 pp. Viking. $40.Gary J. Bass’s most recent book, “The Blood Telegram: Nixon, Kissinger, and a Forgotten Genocide,” was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize.Advertisement