https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/13/smarter-living/counting-calories-harmful-helpful.html
Is Counting Calories Harmful? Helpful? (Should We Even Bother?) - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1503
AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim HerreraWelcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. The Smarter Living team emails readers once a week with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox every Monday morning.Should we or shouldn’t we? It’s a question that anyone who has dieted — or thought about dieting — has wrestled with.On the one hand, it’s very simple to track your calorie intake. It’s just one number you have to think about. On the other hand, tracking calories doesn’t really tell you much, and it can lead to an unhealthy obsession that can ultimately do more harm than good.On my own healthy living journey, tracking calories was the first step to learning about nutrition in general. The simplicity of worrying about just one number is alluring, and it was a springboard to a deeper understanding about what my body needs — and doesn’t need.(I love food tracking apps, and I recommend a few here, among other items: 5 Cheap(ish) Wellness Items You Didn’t Know You Needed.)This week I invited the registered dietitian Abby Langer to chat about whether dieters should count calories and the pitfalls of doing so, what some alternatives are and more.Tim Herrera: Thank you for chatting with me, Abby! Let’s start easy: What are a few benefits of counting calories?Abby Langer: Counting calories does give you an overall picture of what you’re eating in a day, so that’s a good thing. It’s also helpful for people to understand relative calorie values. (Like that a burger is higher in calories than an apple.)Counting calories can also be very motivating. I mean, I wanted that slice of gingerbread at Starbucks yesterday, but it was 400 calories … no way.TH: Those are all really strong positives. So what are some of the downsides here?AL: Well first of all, nobody really knows how many calories they really need. I mean, 2000 or 2200 is what everybody says an adult male needs, but what if you’re smaller than average? What if you’re more active?Also, the calorie counts on packaging can actually be off by up to 20 percent and still be within FDA guidelines! Can you imagine? Your 200 calorie snack is now 240 calories or 180 calories.And don’t forget that processed food is absorbed differently by the body than whole, uncooked food. So really, what I’m trying to say is this: If you think you know how many calories you need, and how many you’re truly getting, you’re probably incorrect. Isn’t that annoying?(Not to mention the fact that people who are at risk for or who have a history of an eating disorder can be majorly triggered by counting anything.)TH: Yeesh, that’s so many downsides. What are some alternative tracking methods you’d recommend if people want to track their eating habits?AL: Writing down what you ate, when you ate it and how you felt — especially if you’re prone to emotional eating — is a great way to keep track of things without drilling it down into numbers. It can be a hassle, but food records can be really effective.TH: I love food tracking apps, and I feel like they’re sort of a middle ground between a lot of what you’ve talked about. What are your thoughts on those kinds of apps?AL: The issue with those is that they still count calories, so even if your intentions are good the calorie-count part can be irresistible for some people. And some apps also track activity and subtract calories burned by exercise from calories eaten, and that couldn’t be more wrong.TH: Yes! They do do that. It sounds like you’re not a fan …AL: It’s not how your body works. You can’t exercise off food like that! I believe you can only exercise off up to 30 percent of the calories you eat in one day, but with some apps it appears that you can negate your whole day of eating with a trip to the gym. Nope.TH: So, O.K., despite the downsides, counting calories is still such an easy to way to track food intake. So if people are going to do it anyway (ahem), what’s the bottom line? What should we take away?AL: I would try to remember to look for patterns versus taking every calorie literally. And remember: Never feel bad or guilty about overindulging every once in a while, even when it’s a scary thing to look at on your tracker. One crazy day of eating never a diet ruined.TH: Yes! That is so so important. Any last thoughts you want to leave us with?AL: Remember to concentrate on quality of diet instead of blindly trying to fulfill some perceived and arbitrary calorie need. Food should be enjoyable!Have a great week!—TimSix Myths About Choosing a College Major Not all philosophy majors wind up as baristas, and not all engineers get rich. Here’s what you need to know before making this big decision.You Need an Accountability Partner. (Or a Punch in the Nose.) Having trouble getting the most meaningful things in your life done? Team up with a trusted partner who will punish you if you don’t meet a weekly goal.Getting the House Ready for Winter As the temperature drops, it’s time to get your home ready for colder weather, both inside and out.10 Things to Know About Getting Into Your Dream College There’s no magic formula for getting into a selective college, but here are some lessons from a longtime observer to help you navigate the process.The Four Rules of Thanksgiving Wines What to drink should be the least of your worries. With good food and good company there are no bad bottles, as the wine panel demonstrates.One Last Question Before the Operation: Just How Frail Are You?Surgeons are testing older patients to see how likely they are to survive procedures.This week I invited Kara Cutruzzula, who writes a fantastic daily newsletter about work, productivity and life in general, to share some of her favorite stories from this week about getting things done with a creative twist:Don’t Compare Your Imagined Accomplishments to Other People’s Actual Ones Keeping a healthy perspective on works in progress can keep impostor syndrome at bay.For Better Brainstorming, Tell an Embarrassing Story Need to loosen up a meeting? Research shows that self-deprecating anecdotes can lead to creative breakthroughs (and plenty of future office in-jokes).26 Time-Management Tricks I Wish I’d Known at 20 Quick, tasty, snack-sized advice about setting end dates for stressful activities, using constraints as opportunities and separating brainless and strategic tasks.You Can’t Be Creative Without Being in Your Body Going for a walk stimulates spontaneous, free-flowing, divergent thinking, while sitting at your desk … well, you already know the answer to this one.The Hardest Working Women We Know I was inspired by the extraordinary (and extraordinarily busy) rabbis, preschool teachers, and social workers interviewed by author Curtis Sittenfeld and her sister Jo.Advertisement