https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/02/opinion/joe-biden-2020-presidential-campaign.html
Opinion | The Real Joe Biden Decision - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
95
AdvertisementSupported byIt’s not whether to run, but whether to run against the emerging consensus of his party. By Ross DouthatOpinion ColumnistAt some point soon, Joe Biden is going to have to make two decisions. The first is whether he wants to run for the Democratic nomination. The second is whether he wants to win it, and at what cost.Right now, even after some slippage, Biden has the highest polling numbers of any candidate in the race. He also has a record that’s completely out of step with his party’s activists and ideologists, a highly … familiar personal style that promises further accusations like the ones already leveled by Lucy Flores and Amy Lappos, and a base of support that’s roughly as old as he is.The combination makes it easy to imagine Biden running a campaign that ends up feeling like an apology tour, in which he talks endlessly about how much he has learned and grown since the days when he was a tough-on-crime Democrat who opposed school busing and sometimes voted for late-term abortion limits. Some of the ideas apparently bandied about by his aides — a one-term pledge! Stacey Abrams as a running mate! — fit with this strategy, in which the goal would be to establish Biden as a temporary bridge to a woker future, a candidate ready to put his moderate past behind him and serve the new liberal consensus.That kind of Biden campaign would probably lose. Indeed, it would probably lose — I know this is harsh — as badly as Jeb Bush did.Why? Because in a big primary field, with a lot of flavors available to voters, it’s very hard to hold your base if you aren’t giving that base a clear reason to vote for you. And the only reason anyone would affirmatively want to vote for Biden is the same reason so many liberals now despise the very idea of his candidacy: because he has that moderate record, because he’s closer to the political center than many of his critics, because he’s out of step with what Matt Yglesias of Vox recently called “the Great Awokening” — the sudden leftward turn on issues of race and immigration and identity.The key point here is that while the Great Awokening has transformed the Democratic Party, it hasn’t entirely eliminated the constituency for a Bill Clintonian form of moderation. The party has embraced left-wing ideas about structural racism, but there are still lots of Democratic voters — minority voters included, as white liberals have outpaced blacks and Hispanics in their wokeness — who would endorse the rhetoric of personal responsibility and colorblindness that the party’s activists now disdain as “respectability politics.” The party is more zealously pro-choice than ever, but there are still Democrats who identify as pro-life; the party is vigorously pro-#MeToo, but there are still Democrats (the Al Franken constituency and others) who worry that the movement has gone too far.And that’s just social issues: You can find similar constituencies who aren’t yet sold on the full social-democratic agenda, who still find the old Clinton-era mix of middle-class tax cuts and targeted spending more appealing than the Bernie Sanders turn.These groups — a mix of older white Democrats, culturally moderate African-Americans and Hispanics, and anti-Trump suburbanites — probably don’t amount to a primary-season majority. But they might add up to a large plurality in a divided field, which could easily be enough to win the nomination. (It’s how Sanders will win it, if he does — with a very different plurality, of course — and it’s how Trump won the Republican nomination in 2016.)To unite this plurality, though, Biden would have to actually appeal to them openly and directly, which would require taking ownership of his record: not defending everything, not avoiding all apologies, but arguing explicitly that some tough-on-crime policies were a necessary response to a destructive multi-decade crime wave, that some moderation on abortion should be acceptable in the Democratic Party and that the Ocasio-Cortezan turn on economic policy should be questioned or resisted. And, yes, defending his personal familiarity, hugs and nose-rubs and hair-kisses and all, and in the process questioning some aspects of #MeToo.Absent that argument, in a primary where Biden is just an old white dude running away from his record, the party’s various moderate voters will almost certainly fracture and go to fresher candidates with cleaner pitches — to the Texan Jesus or the South Bend Meritocrat or the Mean Minnesotan or the Racial Optimist. (That would be Beto O’Rourke, Pete Buttigieg, Amy Klobuchar and Cory Booker, respectively — none of whom are likely to challenge the Great Awokening directly, but all of whom offer something to Democratic voters wary of the left.)However: To run the way I’m suggesting, on his record rather than against it, would exact a possibly extraordinary cost. Just to campaign this way would make Biden hated by many liberals in a way that would make today’s Twitter animosity look mild. To win the nomination this way would produce fury on a scale that far eclipsed the pro-Sanders anger in 2016 and guarantee a strong 2020 showing for Jill Stein’s grifter left (if not a more sincere alternative). And to lose the nomination this way — which would remain, obviously, a strong possibility — would ensure that Biden exited the stage of liberal politics not as an elder statesman but as a wrong-side-of-history bad guy.Naturally I’d still like Biden to try it — not least because some of the party’s Reagan and Clinton-era compromises were Actually Good, and it would be good for today’s Democrats if a prominent Democrat defended them. But even as a biased outsider to Democratic politics, I can see why Biden would shrink from the strategy, shrink from dividing his party by challenging its new consensus, shrink from being hated by his co-partisans.If so, though, I hope he has the wisdom not to run at all.The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTOpinion) and Instagram, join the Facebook political discussion group, Voting While Female.Ross Douthat has been an Opinion columnist for The Times since 2009. He is the author of several books, most recently, “To Change the Church: Pope Francis and the Future of Catholicism.” You can follow him on Twitter:  @DouthatNYT You can follow him on Twitter:  @DouthatNYT Advertisement