https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/08/arts/television/game-of-thrones-season-2-part-2.html
‘Game of Thrones’ Season 2, Part 2: Is a Comet Ever Just a Comet? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1736
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jennifer VineyardThe final season of “Game of Thrones” arrives April 14. Before then, we’re getting prepared by rewatching the first seven seasons. Sign up to get these straight to your inbox.This article contains spoilers for Seasons 1-7 of “Game of Thrones.”It’s 10 p.m. — do you know where your dragons are? If not, we’re here to help, as we wrap up Season 2 in our great rewatch. If you missed the first Season 2 installment on Monday, it’s available here. If you have any burning questions you would like answered, send them to gameofthrones@nytimes.com.House Baratheon is the biggest loser — Renly died, Stannis suffered a major defeat in the Battle of the Blackwater. House Stark won battles but lost Winterfell. Tyrion’s star was on the rise, but his own House doesn’t give him credit for saving King’s Landing.House Tyrell, however, takes a licking but keeps on ticking — Margaery started the season as Renly’s queen, and ended the season striking a deal to become Joffrey’s. All hail the queen.Just as in our world, the tension between competing forms of mysticism and skepticism is a defining feature of “Game of Thrones.” It is also a prominent theme of Season 2, beginning with the red comet that streaks through the sky in the first episode.The men in the North see it as a sign that Robb Stark will win the war. Others see it as a sign that the Lannisters will rule the Seven Kingdoms. Osha tells Bran of the latest hot takes before concluding, “Stars don’t fall for men. The red comet means one thing, boy: dragons.”It’s possible. Or a comet could be just a comet.Everyone is certain that their interpretation is correct, just as they’re certain that their god or gods are the right ones. As the pirate Salladhor Saan says: “I’ve been all over the world, my boy, and everywhere I go, people tell me about the ‘true god.’ They all think they’ve found the right one.”Maester Luwin says that magic might have once been a mighty force, but not anymore: “The dragons are gone, the giants are dead and the Children of the Forest forgotten.” But we’ve seen the dragons hatch, and we know that not everything that was thought to be extinct is really gone. Pyat Pree claims that magic has grown stronger in the world since the birth of Dany’s dragons.Bran has prophetic dreams. “My dreams are different,” he insists. “Mine are true.”Dany has prophetic dreams, too. “I’m no ordinary woman,” she insists. “My dreams come true.”Like horoscopes, the dreams are easier to read in hindsight. Bran’s vision of a sea coming to Winterfell and drowned men floating in the yard — of course that’s Theon Greyjoy’s takeover! Dany’s vision of snow (Snow?) on the Iron Throne in the House of the Undying? It could be a trick, a temptation — we won’t know if it’s actually a prediction until, presumably, we learn how this story ends.And then we have this story’s most self-aggrandizing seer: Melisandre. She tells of a prophecy regarding her god and a reincarnated hero known as the Prince (or Princess) that was Promised, who had been sent to vanquish the Great Other.“After the Long Summer, darkness will fall heavy on the world,” she says. “Stars will bleed. The cold breath of winter will freeze the seas, and the dead shall rise in the North. In the ancient books it is written that a warrior shall draw a burning sword from the fire, and that sword shall be Lightbringer.”Some of that seems to be coming true. She tells Stannis that he is the Lord’s chosen, and they base their battle strategies on this assumption.While Melisandre repeatedly demonstrates her magical abilities — She can look younger and prettier! She can birth shadow babies! She can resurrect the dead! — performing magic and reading prophecies are different powers.Besides, her actual intentions aren’t entirely clear. She insists that Stannis will be king, but the more interesting prediction comes when she tells him that he will betray everything he once held dear. Is that really prophecy, or is she priming him with the power of suggestion? Much of what Melisandre does with Stannis is psychology and seduction, not magic.Even if we take what she says at face value, her beliefs don’t line up with those of the Red Temple priests and priestesses we meet later — they believe Dany is the Chosen One. Not Jon. And certainly not Stannis.So did Melisandre truly believe Stannis was the Chosen One and flock to his side? Or did she sell him on that idea solely out of self-interest, perhaps hoping he would make the Red Temple’s faith the state religion of Westeros? (It’s hard to turn down a belief system in which you’re the messiah).But shouldn’t a fabled hero be able to draw his burning sword from the fire on his own, without a priestess essentially handing it to him?Fans love to try to decode these visions and prophecies, but we should be wary not to repeat Melisandre’s mistakes. Prophecies are like propaganda — they can be useful for propping someone up but they rarely tell the whole story, and believing in them can ensure your doom.In an interview seven years ago, George R.R. Martin addressed the traditional audience expectation that the hero “is the chosen one, and he is always protected by his destiny.” Martin said he didn’t want that to be the case in A Song of Ice and Fire. Or, as Tyrion says in the books, “Prophecy is like a half-trained mule. It looks as though it might be useful, but the moment you trust in it, it kicks you in the head.”Stannis, your prophecy awaits you. Believe at your own risk.Many characters in “Game of Thrones” live and die by the sword, but few expect to be stabbed in the heart by a magical shadow. We talked to the actor Gethin Anthony about King Renly’s abbreviated reign in Season 2. (Adapted from an interview for an earlier article.)How did you find out about your character’s death?While auditioning, I read the first and most of the second book. By the time I was called in to read for Renly, I was well aware of his grisly demise. It made the process feel more like a movie for me. I knew his beginning, middle and tragic end before stepping on set. It clarified in my mind what my approach should be.Did you read any of the fan reaction?I’ve heard some very nice things said about Renly. Whatever you can say about his naïveté in dealing with Stannis and Melisandre, he had a good heart. People have told me they miss the character, which is just lovely.I think they miss seeing Renly and Loras together as well.I feel like it could be a whole spinoff! As preparation for Season 2, I wrote a little fan fiction for myself about Renly, Loras and the marriage of Margaery. I had all these visuals in my head for the end of Season 1, beginning of Season 2: What they did between the seasons. The nights they stole away together — on the wedding night, Renly and Loras just went off to be by a lake under the trees.How did you feel about Brienne avenging Renly?Finally! She took some time. Watching Brienne kick ass with Stannis was a good thing. But Melisandre … She’s become this huge presence, this darkness in the show, and Brienne needs to sort it out. I think Melisandre represents the corruption that power brings. It’s quite hard to fight these fantastical, supernatural forces. Keep training, keep up the sword fighting, but ultimately, get a powerful ally.What do you remember from your last day on set?We were doing a quick shot in Renly’s camp on the beach at night with the wind blowing and huge lighting setups. Seeing all those hundreds of people working in these epic circumstances as I got to say goodbye really brought home what a privilege it was to be a part of this huge endeavor.Who had your favorite death and why?Viserys. I always thought the symbolism of him being burned to death with the gold he so coveted was a brilliant representation of what the books and the show were about.Gethin Anthony (Renly Baratheon) went from murder victim to murder mastermind on the now-canceled NBC historical fiction drama “Aquarius,” in which he played Charles Manson for two seasons. He next plays a god of war on “The Magicians.”Kerr Logan (Matthos Seaworth) has been very, very busy since the Battle of Blackwater. Logan played a murderous stable hand in “Alias Grace,” a manipulative fiancé on “C.B. Strike,” and a queen’s barrister in “Victoria.”Roxanne McKee (Doreah) went from duplicitous Khaleesi handmaiden to ruler of Vega Claire Riesen in the Syfy series “Dominion.” Now she is one of the leads on “Strike Back: Retribution,” playing Captain Natalie Reynolds.Nonso Anozie (Xaro Xhoan Daxos) escaped the vault in Qarth to take on the role of Domovoi Butler, the trusted servant and bodyguard of Artemis, in the upcoming film adaptation of “Artemis Fowl.”• Our recap of Season 2.• The showrunners on the Battle of the Blackwater.• “Game of Thrones” as history.• Samwell Tarly’s assessment of the climate in Westeros.Tweaking a minor character might not seem significant at a glance, but converting Jeyne Westerling, the daughter of a Lannister bannerman, to Talisa Maegyr, a battlefield nurse from Volantis, rippled far beyond just her story.It also changed the reason Robb Stark throws away his alliance with the Freys, which, as we know, leads to all sorts of trouble for him and others.In “A Clash of Kings,” a wounded Robb learns of Theon’s purported execution of his younger brothers Bran and Rickon. In his anguish, Robb receives “comfort” (i.e. sex) from the young noblewoman tending his wounds at the castle he just conquered. This is perhaps an understandable lapse in judgment, because of his youth (he’s even younger in the books), his grief and his state of mind (he’s feverish and might have been given milk of the poppy). The problem is, Jeyne’s not a prostitute or a commoner — she’s a lord’s daughter. So Robb is honor-bound to marry her.Robb faces an ethical dilemma. This is not a dating game, choosing between the possibly ugly Frey behind door No. 1 and the winsome Westerling behind door No. 2. It’s actually a choice between protecting his own honor or protecting someone else’s. Since he’s Ned Stark’s son, he tries to protect someone else, even though it could end in misery. And sure enough, book-Robb makes a tragic mistake that leads to many deaths, including his own.TV Robb isn’t facing an ethical dilemma — he’s disregarding honor entirely. He actively pursues this young woman, whom he finds beautiful and intriguing, even though he’s already committed to an arranged marriage. He chooses to spend time with her when he could be sorting out troop movements, perusing battle plans or seeking counsel from his top lieutenant (a slight that Roose Bolton doesn’t forget, and which leads to his participation in the Red Wedding). Even after Catelyn warns her son away from battlefield hookups when he’s betrothed to another, Robb continues flirting with Talisa.Because this is all presented as a love story, we’re supposed to root for the young lovers. And isn’t Talisa a great catch — smart, sassy, good with amputations? Best of all, she’s not taking sides in this ugly war.Or is she?In the books, Robb’s marriage to Jeyne was a little more suspicious — and, quite possibly, a setup. The Westerlings may not have been privy to the entirety of the Red Wedding plans, but they had some sort of an “understanding” with Tywin, which included making sure Robb did not conceive an heir with his new bride. Jeyne never got pregnant, did not attend the massacre and is still alive.Knowing the extent of the Westerling conspiracy to undermine and destroy the Starks, some book readers were understandably confused by the show’s name-and-character swap between Jeyne and Talisa and the large deviation from the book plot. It didn’t help that the character was originally listed as “Jeyne Westerling,” until George R.R. Martin suggested to the showrunners that if they were going to change Robb’s wife’s back story to make her a citizen from Volantis, they should also give her a Volantene name. (Thus: “Talisa Maegyr.”)Conspiracy theories naturally arose that Talisa must be a Lannister loyalist posing as a Volantene noblewoman, and had been sent to seduce Robb and spy on him — in other words, she was still Jeyne, but with the rest of the Westerlings excised. After all, she keeps writing all these letters! This honey pot theory was debated throughout Seasons 2 and 3, and the issue wasn’t settled until her death at the Red Wedding.It’s possible the showrunners did intend this character to be a spy at one point, but then decided that would make the story too complicated. Or maybe they just wanted a simple, tragic love story.In our last installment, we asked if you had any burning questions — and boy, did you! Two readers asked related questions, which we’ve lighted edited for clarity:“Why did Littlefinger have Lysa kill her husband? What did Littlefinger have to gain in his death other than causing lots of chaos?” — Teresa PratherControl. Instead of allowing Jon Arryn to run to King Robert with the twincest news, Petyr Baelish can manipulate the release of this valuable information, to his own benefit. Knocking Arryn off the board also creates two vacancies: Hand of the King and Lord of the Vale. Hand of the King, he can predict, will be filled by the more gullible Ned Stark (whose wife he’s long desired). Leadership of the Vale would fall to Lysa (who is already in his thrall).Blaming the Lannisters for the murder sets them against the biggest power block (Houses Arryn, Tully, Stark and Baratheon), creating a feud in which he could play both sides. Even if one of Littlefinger’s goals was lots of chaos, it’s chaos with predictable outcomes — a new king, hopefully one he can pick, and some lands and titles (and their attendant wealth) from whichever side wins. Plus the pleasure of pulling all the strings.“How exactly did Tyrion manipulate Catelyn into releasing Jaime? What was the trick that he pulled?” — Mark RobsonTyrion’s manipulation is also aided by Littlefinger. In Season 2, Episode 3, Tyrion recruits Littlefinger for his “next deception”: to offer Catelyn a prisoner exchange — Jaime Lannister for her two daughters. One snag: the Lannisters don’t have both of the Stark daughters to trade. When Littlefinger presents Catelyn the offer at Renly’s camp, he lies, implying Arya is safe and sound. He also gives Catelyn Ned’s bones as a token of good faith. She falls for the bait and releases the Kingslayer.Send your own questions to gameofthrones@nytimes.com.• Find a dragon, get a reward.• Steve Love does impressions.• Ever wonder what political attack ads would look like in Westeros? Here.• House sigils for other TV families.• Go to a baby shower with Melisandre.• We know nothing, Jon Snow.If you missed the first Season 2 installment, it’s available here. Find our rewatch guides to Season 1 here and here.Advertisement