https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/26/us/politics/thomas-steyer-nextgen-climate-change-voters.html
Billionaire Environmentalist to Spend $25 Million to Turn Out Young Voters - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2354
AdvertisementSupported byBy Coral DavenportWASHINGTON — The billionaire environmentalist Thomas F. Steyer and his political advocacy group, NextGen Climate, will spend at least $25 million on a get-out-the-vote campaign targeting young voters this year in seven mostly battleground states, the group announced on Monday.Mr. Steyer, the single biggest political donor of the 2014 midterm election cycle, said the campaign would target at least 203 college and university campuses. He called it the largest youth voter outreach program ever undertaken by a candidate or political campaign.Mr. Steyer spent $74 million in the 2014 midterm elections, including $67 million for NextGen Climate to reward candidates who embraced climate change as a major issue. That year, Democrats were clobbered, losing control of the Senate and falling deeper into the minority in the House. Of the seven candidates for Senate or governor NextGen Climate spent money on, three won.Undeterred, Mr. Steyer said on Monday that the $25 million dedicated to voter outreach was a floor, not a ceiling. His group expects to press other efforts focused on electing climate-friendly lawmakers.Outreach to young voters will concentrate on the swing states of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Iowa, Colorado, Nevada and New Hampshire, as well as Illinois.And this year, the impact of Mr. Steyer’s largess could be amplified by the reluctance of conservative megadonors to spend. Charles G. Koch, the billionaire bankroller of conservative causes, suggested on Sunday that Hillary Clinton could make a better president than the two Republican front-runners. Other Republican donors, such as the casino magnate Sheldon Adelson, have been similarly reluctant to open their wallets.While polls show that younger people are more likely to support candidates with strong environmental policies, they are also less likely to show up at the polls.“As I traveled around the country in the 2014 election cycle, I saw that young voters care deeply about climate change, but what they haven’t been is as engaged in the electoral process as older Americans,” Mr. Steyer told reporters on a conference call.“Millennials are the biggest cohort in this election cycle,” he added. “When they do engage, it can make a difference in these states. This is about turnout and letting millennials’ voices be heard.”In the 2014 election, Mr. Steyer’s group spent heavily on expensive television advertising. This time, taking a page from Americans for Prosperity, the conservative group backed by Mr. Koch and his brother David, the effort will shift to person-to-person contact, voter registration and a get-out-the-vote ground game.The prospect of a Democratic presidential candidate going against a Republican who denies the existence of human-caused climate change should increase passions on the issue.“On climate change, we have the starkest contrast I’ve ever seen between candidates in my life — and I’m fairly old,” Mr. Steyer said.Donald J. Trump and Ted Cruz, the Republican presidential front-runners, have vowed to reverse President Obama’s policies on climate change and withdraw the United States from the Paris agreement, which commits nearly every country to taking actions to reduce planet-warming greenhouse gas emissions.In the Democratic primary, Mrs. Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont have highlighted their environmental credentials, and have vowed to uphold and strengthen Mr. Obama’s climate change policies.Mr. Steyer said his group would not endorse presidential or Senate candidates for now, given that primary races are still underway.Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement