https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/07/business/happy-job-problem.html
You’re Happy With Your Job. Why Is That a Problem? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1816
AdvertisementSupported byThe assignments are fine, the colleagues great, the benefits terrific. But you’re not doing anything impressive, and you know it. Here’s how to keep your groove from turning into a rut.By Rob WalkerSend your workplace conundrums to workologist@nytimes.com, including your name and contact information (even if you want it withheld). The Workologist is a guy with well-intentioned opinions, not a professional career adviser. Letters may be edited.I work at a very large nonprofit in a creative role. I am paid well, with good benefits and absolutely fantastic colleagues. The general line of work is exactly what I want to be doing; specific assignments range from “eh” to enjoyable. There are enough fringe benefits to support personal growth (though I haven’t used them much).That said: I’m in a niche role with pretty much zero possibility for vertical growth. I stay here largely because I have a great thing going. My creative body of work (my “portfolio”) has stagnated as a result. It isn’t bad, just increasingly unremarkable. And that’s been a constant ache in the back of my mind for at least three years now. But the truth of the matter is that I’m not really motivated to leave or to bolster my portfolio on the side. I’m happily content saving money, investing in my future and putting my energy into social and personal matters. And yet I fear my career is a ticking time bomb waiting to explode in my face. How do I reconcile?NEW YORKActually, you’re not happily content. If you really were, you wouldn’t be writing to the Workologist, describing a “constant ache” and a fear that your career is a “ticking time bomb.” You’d be blithely going about your business without a care in the world. But in fact this stagnation, as you describe it, is clearly bothering you. If you want to make that aching fear go away, you’ll have to do something about it. That doesn’t mean you have to quit a job that you enjoy and thrust yourself into some new situation that’s a nonstop creative challenge. But you could, for instance, seek out work within your current job that forces you to learn new things, or otherwise push your own boundaries. Or, as you mention, you could take up personal side projects related to a cause or an idea that you’re passionate about. Volunteer your services; start something of your own. Make a personal challenge to yourself that you’ll create one thing in the next three months that will definitively improve your portfolio. Then do that again.To be clear, there’s nothing wrong with contentment, and I’m not an advocate of change for the sake of change. If you’ve got a good thing that you appreciate, keep it. But the danger of contentment, particularly in the modern job market, is that it can slide into complacency. That ache you feel might indeed be a kind of warning signal to yourself. Take it as motivation to push a little, before your groove becomes a rut. Over time you’ll find it’s better to be engaged and learning and growing than it is to feel that it’s “Groundhog Day” from here on out. You don’t have to reinvent your life, just find new ways to keep work interesting. Sometimes the best way to attain real contentment is to make yourself, now and then, a little uncomfortable. Regarding your recent item advising a reader on how to explain getting fired: I cannot believe you suggested that a five-month job might be left off a résumé! I was an executive recruiter for over 20 years, and if an omission like that had been discovered, it probably would have ended the applicant’s candidacy immediately. How would you feel if your spouse had been married previously for five months but figured it wasn’t worth mentioning to you, so he or she never did? BARBARA P., CHICAGOOf course one should exercise both common sense, and common ethical decency, in crafting a résumé. Don’t claim to have walked on the moon if you didn’t; don’t cover up your conviction for embezzlement when applying for a finance job. That said, a résumé is not a legal document; it’s a personal marketing document. I don’t think it’s a sin to leave off a five-month gig that was just a bad match, says nothing about your skills or your character, and was a one-off negative experience. I hesitate to equate an employer with a spouse, but this is less comparable to a prior marriage than to an ill-fated fling. Still, individual opinions about that may vary: If it feels uncomfortable or dishonest to leave a job off, then don’t. Agreed, there is at least some potential risk that an employer could find out and sour on you. That’s why the option was mentioned as something to consider, and most of the column focused on how to best explain a bad experience that you’ve chosen to disclose. But turn the proposition around: Does an employer share a similar obligation to disclose every single blemish, misstep and potential for future decline? Or is a company allowed to present the best truthful version of itself possible? I’m pretty sure the latter is what happens in real life. So I don’t see why a job-seeker can’t do the same thing.Advertisement