https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/23/dining/three-recipes-to-savor-to-the-last-crumb.html
Three Recipes to Savor to the Last Crumb - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2296
AdvertisementSupported byBy The New York TimesWhite Slices, Rich and Moist, Sporting a Milk-Sweet CrustModern bakers like the ones in this issue are justifiably proud of their hard work. They have brought Americans back to real bread, leading us from a desert of supermarket white bread into the promised land of whole-wheat sourdough and rustic boules.The only hiccup in this inspiring narrative is that white bread (soft, butter-scented, made from whole ingredients) can be a most delicious thing. At influential bakeries like Clear Flour Bread in Brookline, Mass., or Tartine in San Francisco, it is often easier to find a flaxseed levain or a chestnut fougasse than a Pullman loaf of white bread. (Perfectly square loaf pans, with lids to prevent any unseemly rising of the dough during baking, were adopted by the designers of Pullman train cars, where kitchens were functional and compact.)Fortunately, white bread is still venerated at bakeries in Asia, where it has been elevated to “artisan” status with a lofty, feathery crumb, a milk-sweet crust and a naturally long shelf life. Called shokupan, milk bread, pai bao and by other names, this bread is a miracle of engineering: moist but not gummy, rich but light, balanced between sweet and salty.At baking chains like Paris Baguette, based in Seoul, this is achieved with industrial proofers and artificial flavors. The key to making it at home is tangzhong, a warm, puddinglike starter quickly made by cooking a small amount of flour with water or milk. Janice Wong, a pastry chef in Singapore, said tangzhong is a traditional Chinese way of making dough for steamed buns. (The characters mean, roughly, “soup method.”)“Asian doughs tend to have small, fine air bubbles,” she said. The method was applied to white bread by Japanese bakers in the 20th century and became a staple in Asian bakeries. “About half of Japanese people eat toast for breakfast,” said Kimie Kobayashi, the manager of Takahachi Bakery in TriBeCa, where shokupan is made daily. “The customers here seem surprised to hear that.”The eminent food scientist Harold McGee said tangzhong is different from other starters (like autolyse, levain, biga and the unappetizingly named poolish) because it hydrates and gels the starches in the flour, giving the bread its characteristic fluff and spring. If you wish to delve more deeply into the science (and enjoy feeling like an uninformed boob), go to bread blogs and baking forums, like thefreshloaf.com. There, interactions of gluten, starch, fat, heat, salt and other factors are discussed at a postgraduate level.If not, get out your stand mixer and be prepared to feed the hordes. — JULIA MOSKINRecipe: Japanese Milk BreadEnglish Muffins, Made as Crispy as You Like (Before Toasting)I’d always listed English muffins under the buy-it-don’t-bake-it category of breadstuffs. What’s the point of serving fresh out of the oven something that you’re supposed to toast anyway?Then I bit into a homemade English muffin dripping with butter and changed my mind. It was vapor-light, audibly crisp and riddled with tiny crevices to hold puddles of butter and jam. Even better, it has a pronounced yeasty, toasty flavor that was leagues better than the packaged kind.While making English muffins is not fast (you need to let the dough rise), it isn’t difficult. The hardest part for me to get my brain around was the two-step cooking process; they have to be seared in a skillet on the stove top before baking in the oven. That initial searing is crucial to the texture of the finished, toasted muffin, which needs to have crunch on the flat outside and on the toasted peaks of the fork-split, jagged interior.Either butter or oil will work to sear the muffins. Butter tastes better but burns more easily, so watch these carefully as they brown, and keep the heat low.You can split and toast these as soon as they are cool enough to pick up. Or split and freeze them, then defrost in the toaster as needed.I’ve tried this recipe both with and without molding them in muffin rings. The rings make the muffins more uniform in shape and a little taller. If you use rings, add a few minutes onto the baking time to accommodate the muffins’ increased thickness. But I actually prefer them flatter and less perfectly round. I say that if you’re going to take the time to make your own English muffins, they might as well look the part. — MELISSA CLARKRecipe: Whole-Wheat English MuffinsA Simple Loaf Accentuated By Toasted Walnuts and OilWalnuts and whole wheat speak the same language; both are earthy and slightly tannic, accented with a scintilla of sweetness. Their affinity plays out well in this fairly simple loaf.I ramped up the walnut component by mixing in toasted pieces, including ground nuts along with the flour and even adding walnut oil to the dough. The rustic whole-wheat flavor was not derailed by adding bread flour (at a proportion of almost half), which guaranteed a better texture.Making this bread is straightforward enough for the home cook to master. No sponge is necessary; rather, using a normal packet of yeast will give the dough a nice rise. And though I often haul out the baker’s stone for the oven, I am just as happy using my heavy, roomy black-steel baking sheet, which heats up fast. Tossing a handful of ice cubes on the oven floor creates steam.This dough would also welcome raisins, olives or pieces of figs along with the walnuts, or in place of them. I have found that the best way to introduce ingredients like these is to knead them in after the first rise. The bread is excellent with cheeses like fresh chèvre, Humboldt Fog, a funky washed-rind treasure like taleggio, or the nutty-tasting aged Pleasant Ridge Reserve or Comté. Slice it and serve it plain or lightly toasted, spread with honey and good butter or topped smorrebrod style with egg salad or smoked salmon. — FLORENCE FABRICANTRecipe: Walnut Bread And from our archives, the ever-popular No-Knead Bread from Jim Lahey of Sullivan Street Bakery and Mark Bittman. Recipes: No-Knead Bread | Speedy No-Knead Bread | Fast No-Knead Whole Wheat Bread cookingcookingcookingAdvertisement