https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/27/dining/wine-review-douro.html
Searching for Soul Among Douro Reds - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1971
AdvertisementSupported byWines of The TimesBy Eric AsimovIn theory, the Douro Valley of Portugal ought to be making fascinating, distinctive red wines. It has a singular array of indigenous grapes and excellent hillside terroirs proven through centuries in the port business.In more recent years, the Douro has turned energetically and skillfully to making table wines. These include some good whites, though the focus has largely been on reds.The Douro offers well-made wines and very good values. Yet the wine panel recently tasted 20 Douro reds from the 2012 and 2013 vintages and was left feeling that too often something seemed to be lacking.For the tasting, Florence Fabricant and I were joined by Laura Maniec, proprietor of the Corkbuzz wine bars, and Rob Renteria, who was visiting New York from San Francisco, where he is a sommelier at La Folie.It was not a problem of quality. We didn’t find bottles that were marred or badly made. If anything, the problem was the opposite: unimpeachable winemaking. Too many of the wines seemed too polished and glossy, with the flavors of ripe blueberries presented with a shimmer of oak and underlying wood tannins.This is not necessarily bad business. A thriving market exists for glistening, powerfully fruity wines. Laura said several times that these wines made her think of Argentine malbecs from Mendoza, a region that has achieved great success largely by giving the market what it wants.It wasn’t so much the flavor profile that reminded her of malbecs, she said, but the feeling that the wines represented safe, easy choices. They seemed a bit calculated.I don’t blame producers for calculating what sort of wines will sell well, and I would never tell anybody how to run a business. But wines like these can simultaneously impress because of the skill with which they are made but underwhelm because they lack originality. In short, they are boring.Let me issue the usual qualifications here. Twenty bottles is by no means a complete tasting. It is a representative cross section of what’s available commercially. I don’t want to speak overly generally about the Douro or Portuguese wines. But I will say that too many of the wines we tasted lacked soul or a sense of place.We all agreed in slightly different ways. Laura said they lacked distinctiveness. Florence thought they were too international in style. Rob said he would have preferred less polish and more rusticity, while I would have liked more earth and less gloss.It was as if some of the wines had been presented like living room furniture sets in plastic slipcovers. Regardless of the occasional danger of a stain, you want to liberate those couches so you can feel the unmediated textures and angles of the upholstery.While this was our prevailing feeling, we did find a handful of wines that we liked very much, wines that we thought we could drink with pleasure or, in the case of our top two, put away to age for a few years.Not surprisingly, these wines generally use the same grapes as port. As with port, most of these reds are blends with touriga nacional and touriga franca, the leading port grapes, as well as tinta barroca, tinta roriz (also known as tempranillo) and any of the more than 80 varieties permitted in port.Our top wine, for example, the 2012 Reserva from Quinta do Vallado, was a field blend of more than 40 different grapes from a vineyard said to be more than a century old.The best of these wines have flavors that resemble port, without, obviously, port’s sweetness or fortification. These flavors include plums and dark fruits, spices, wildflowers and violets, which taken together can seem a bit exotic, especially when not subjected to the homogenizing effect of oakiness.Often in tastings like this one, the less expensive wines show better because they are not sheathed in the same sort of makeup as the pricier bottles. That wasn’t entirely true here. Yes, we rejected the most expensive bottle in the tasting, the 2012 Prats & Symington Chryseia at $75. You could almost taste the money that had gone into its production. Yet the Quinta do Vallado, our top wine, was the second most expensive at $66, and it was lovely, juicy, complex and balanced.Our No. 2 bottle, the 2013 Redoma Tinto from Niepoort, was another field blend from old-vine vineyards. It was spicy and complex, with a barely detectable note of oak that seemed well integrated. This, too, was one of the more expensive bottles at $48.By contrast, our No. 3 wine, the 2013 Esporão Assobio, was our best value at just $15. It was spicy and smoky with aromas and flavors of dark fruit and wildflowers.Next was the exotic, earthy 2012 Passadouro Touriga Franca, one of only a few varietal wines in our tasting along with the fresh, lightly tannic 2012 Touriga nacional from Delaforce, our No. 6 bottle.One of the more unusual wines in the tasting was No. 5, the 2012 Quinta do Infantado, another field blend. Unlike many of the other bottles, this seemed to have been produced with minimum input from the winemaker. It was simple yet delicious, juicy, fruity and floral, the kind of wine you want to knock back when you are thirsty. I personally would love to find more wines like this from the Douro.Portuguese reds are often cited as great values, but we found the less expensive wines to be inconsistent. Eleven of our 20 bottles were $20 or under, but only five of these bottles made our top 10. That’s actually not bad when you consider that of the nine bottles that cost more than $20, only five made it.If a cheap bottle disappoints you, no loss, but it’s harder to justify a $45 miss.You probably won’t go wrong if you like modern wines that taste primarily of fruit and oak. If you do fall into that category, you can find a lot to like here at prices considerably less than, say, Napa Valley cabernet sauvignons or super Tuscans.But if you are looking for wines unencumbered by the tools of the winemaking trade, you will need to choose carefully.★★★ Quinta do Vallado Douro Reserva Field Blend 2012 $66Juicy, lively and well balanced, with aromas and flavors of flowers and dark fruit. (Quintessential, Napa, Calif.)★★★ Niepoort Douro Redoma Tinto 2013 $48Spicy and complex, with flavors of plums, violets and a touch of oak. (Polaner Selections, Mount Kisco, N.Y.)Best Value: ★★★ Esporão Douro Assobio 2013 $15Spicy, with aromas and flavors of wildflowers, smoke and dark fruit. (Aidil, New Bedford, Mass.)★★★ Passadouro Douro Touriga Franca 2012 $36Earthy and balanced, with flavors of blueberries, flowers and well-integrated oak. (Winebow, New York)★★½ Quinta do Infantado Douro 2012 $17Not complex, but juicy, floral, fruity and delicious. (Louis/Dressner Selections, New York)★★½ Delaforce Douro Touriga Nacional 2012 $20Fresh and lightly tannic, with flavors of dark fruit balanced by good acidity. (Signature Imports, Mansfield, Mass.)★★½ Quinta do Crasto Douro Superior 2013 $25Peppery and floral, with juicy flavors stopping just short of jammy. (Broadbent Selections, Sonoma, Calif.)★★ Duorum Douro Colheita 2013 $18Lightly tannic, with well-balanced, exotic fruit flavors. (Winebow)★★ Churchill’s Estates Douro 2012 $18Intense and spicy, with exotic dark fruit flavors and a touch of oak. (Frederick Wildman & Sons, New York)★★ Quinta do Vale Douro Meão 2012 $28Forthright, with juicy, peppery, dark fruit flavors. (Deutsch Family Wine and Spirits, White Plains)Recipe Pairing: Grilled Scallion LambThe only way to tame big Portuguese reds from the Douro is to throw grilled meat at them. Here are lamb kebabs bathed in a spicy-cool Asian marinade and threaded on skewers with whole scallions placed crosswise so all can be seared together, emerging lightly charred and smoky. My butcher suggested top round of lamb, a cut I had never used, but he knew what he was talking about: It was excellent, lean and tender. I have not offered a recipe for a sauce alongside, but romesco, the Spanish pepper, tomato and nut emulsion that’s often served as a dip for grilled baby leeks, would be perfect. FLORENCE FABRICANTcookingAdvertisement