https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/15/us/politics/sherrod-brown-ohio-president.html
Sherrod Brown: Rumpled, Unvarnished and Just Maybe a Candidate for President - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2733
AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberCOLUMBUS, Ohio — One after another, the Democratic candidates in Ohio fell.But there was Senator Sherrod Brown celebrating his re-election last Tuesday night at a hotel ballroom before a crowd of anxious revelers.“Let our country — let our nation’s citizens, our Democratic Party, my fellow elected officials all over the country — let them all cast their eyes towards the heartland,” Mr. Brown said from the stage, dispelling the sense of disappointment that had begun to descend.Then, his gravelly voice rasping out a crescendo, he made it clear where he thought his party could forge its path to success: his triumphant campaign, he said, was the “blueprint for America for 2020.” The revelers roared.If his victory speech seemed to double as a calling card for a possible presidential run, there was good reason. Not only had Mr. Brown won his third term in this crucial battleground that President Trump claimed by eight points, he was the only major Democrat to win a statewide seat in Ohio.Almost immediately, some Democrats began to wonder if Mr. Brown possessed the secret to retaking a state that seemed to be steadily slipping from their grasp.[Read more about the Democrats’ struggles in Ohio here.]A week later — after insisting for years that a run for president was far off his radar — Mr. Brown has begun wondering aloud if he should have the world’s most important job after all.Since the election, Mr. Brown said in a telephone interview this week, he and his wife, the journalist Connie Schultz, have “been overwhelmed by the number of people that have come forward and said, ‘You’ve got to run. You have the right message. You come from the right state.’”So is he running?“We’re thinking about it,” he said.Rumpled and unvarnished — with a fondness for sweatshirts, less so for ties — Mr. Brown would in some ways seem uniquely positioned in a party hoping to win back the Midwestern states that flipped to Mr. Trump. Throughout his political career, he has championed populist platitudes like the “dignity of work” that have resonated with working-class voters in all corners of Ohio while also supporting liberal social causes like women’s reproductive rights and L.G.B.T.Q. rights.Though he disagrees with Mr. Trump on nearly every policy issue, he is aligned with him on trade, opposing the North American Free Trade Agreement long before the president made that a central part of his own campaign.Perhaps more important, Mr. Brown projects a grizzled authenticity that endears his brand of progressivism to even some conservative voters. He talks about how his suits are made just miles from his home in Cleveland and cites scripture at rallies. He wears on his lapel a canary pin that a steelworker gave him years ago and has an enduring passion for the Cleveland Indians. His dog, Franklin, appears frequently on social media and had a starring role in one of the senator’s campaign ads.Yet at a time when Mr. Trump has stoked a fire-breathing liberalism among some Democrats, Mr. Brown has not embraced some key progressive issues, including Medicare for All. And after a midterm season that swept women and minority candidates into office and crowned new progressive superstars, he is a white male career politician from the Midwest.“Democrats win the White House when we have a new, fresh face who’s inspiring and talking a lot about the future,” said Rebecca Katz, a Democratic strategist from the party’s progressive wing.“He’s a traditional Democrat,” she continued, “and I think in the post-Bernie era, it seems that Democratic voters want more than that.”Still, some Democrats view Mr. Brown, 66, as perhaps their best option for putting Ohio and other Midwestern swing states in play: a viable, and younger, alternative to better-known potential candidates like Joseph R. Biden Jr., the former vice president, and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.Even if Ohio has become irreversibly red, some believe Mr. Brown would have a good shot at victory in other rust belt states that Mr. Trump carried, like Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. (Mr. Brown dislikes the term “rust belt” and is known to send gently worded, handwritten letters to reporters if they use it.)Steve Elmendorf, a Washington political strategist and longtime Hillary Clinton supporter, said Mr. Brown would have to outshine higher-wattage candidates in the primaries, but that he has the kind of political bona fides that could appeal to a broad swath of voters.“Having that combination of authenticity, the ability to talk to working people, and the progressive credentials make him a very attractive candidate,” he said.Mr. Brown first ran for public office — a seat in the Ohio legislature — after graduating from Yale in 1974. He spent days when he was not in session hanging out at union halls, which he said helped shape his views about workers.Elected to the House of Representatives in 1992, Mr. Brown quickly established himself as one of the more liberal members of his party. One of his first votes in Congress was against Nafta, cementing his reputation as an unapologetic opponent of free trade deals. In 1996, he voted against the Defense of Marriage Act, which President Clinton would sign into law. He later voted against the Iraq war.As a senator, he has been a blunt critic of Wall Street banks and a passionate defender of the Affordable Care Act.“I don’t buy the left or right,” Mr. Brown said. He said he thought politicians could be progressive on social issues and still win in Ohio, “but you have to be authentic about whom you fight for and what you fight against. That’s just who I am.”There are, of course, many other Democrats considering campaigns. But perhaps no other potential candidate had as grueling an election as Mr. Brown. Neither Senator Kamala Harris of California nor Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey were up for re-election this year, using their time instead to crisscross the country supporting other candidates. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts barely had to campaign in her bid for a second term.One exception is Representative Beto O’Rourke, the Democratic darling who waged a fierce, ultimately unsuccessful challenge in Texas for the Senate seat held by Ted Cruz. Mr. O’Rourke has not mentioned running for president, but his charisma and fund-raising prowess have captured the imagination of some in his party.In the interview, Mr. Brown said he had received a groundswell of support from “a pretty good cross section of Democrats,” including party leaders, elected officials and activists. He declined to provide specifics.But he emphasized that any presidential preparations have been preliminary at best.“I’m not looking to hire people,’’ he said. “I don’t have a planned trip to Iowa or New Hampshire.” (He then quipped that he was not sure he could find a flight anyway “because so many people running for president are flying to Iowa or New Hampshire.”)One person who will wield considerable influence in his decision is his wife, Ms. Schultz, a Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist who worked for many years at The Cleveland Plain Dealer. She has posted, with characteristic clearsightedness, about the possibility on social media.“We are considering this because so many are urging us to,” she wrote on Facebook this week, along with a link to an article by The Columbus Dispatch, which reported Mr. Brown’s deliberations on Monday. “Your thoughts are welcome.”Mr. Brown’s bruising re-election battle made it difficult for him to establish the kind of presidential campaign infrastructure that others may already have, according to a Democratic strategist briefed on his campaign.At the same time, he still has his Senate campaign staff on the payroll, affording him a cadre of operatives who could spring back into action.And while Mr. Brown was strongly considered as a possible running mate to Hillary Clinton in 2016, he has made few attempts to project himself on the national stage. Come primary season, many possible rivals would have far greater name recognition, which could hinder his ability to draw media attention and raise money.“I expect to see a number of people running as if this is the Kentucky Derby with 17 stalls to fill,” said Jerry Austin, a longtime Ohio political consultant who ran the Rev. Jesse Jackson’s presidential campaign. “Would Sherrod benefit from a debate with 16 or 17 people? I don’t know. I don’t know if anyone benefits from that.”But across Ohio, affection for their senator runs deep. Voters recall how he has long stood up for union workers. Party officials praise his ability to connect with everyday Ohioans.“He comes back,” Joe Mudra, the chair of the Richland County Democratic Party, said before an event last month in Mansfield, a former manufacturing city that is also Mr. Brown’s hometown. Mr. Mudra fondly recalled playing pickup baseball in an apartment courtyard with Mr. Brown when they were young. Many in Mansfield still remember Mr. Brown’s mother, a civil rights-supporting teacher, and father, a doctor.On Election Day, Mr. Brown beat his Republican opponent, Representative Jim Renacci, by six percentage points. It was a smaller-than-expected margin, but it came despite Mr. Trump’s last-minute appearance at a rally in Cleveland that seemed to buttress other Republican candidates. Mr. Brown also deflected decades-old abuse allegations related to a messy divorce from his former wife that Republicans have repeatedly tried to use against him. (His former wife, Larke Recchie, has publicly refuted the allegations and has supported Mr. Brown during his political career.)But if Mr. Brown appears to have mastered Ohio, he has indicated that he wants the Democratic Party to have a nominee who can defeat Mr. Trump. Above all, Mr. Brown said, he believes that nominee should be somebody with a “history of fighting for workers” and “a history of speaking to the heartland.”Somebody, it seemed, like him.Advertisement