https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/21/opinion/the-argument-third-party-thanksgiving-debate-democrats-republicans.html
Opinion | How to Survive the Holidays Without an Argument - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
260
AdvertisementListen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Apple Podcasts | RadioPublic | Stitcher | Spotify | Google Play | RSS FeedOn the latest episode of “The Argument” podcast, the columnists respond to a listener’s impassioned plea for a third major political party. Michelle Goldberg spotlights the disastrous track record of third-party candidates so far (looking at you, Ralph Nader and Jill Stein). David Leonhardt explains how states like Maine and New York have tried to mitigate the “spoiler effect” of third-party campaigns. And Ross Douthat argues that insurgent candidacies aid American democracy by shaking up a political system dominated by two stultified major parties.Then, just in time for Thanksgiving, the columnists dish out tips on an activity they’ve mastered over the past seven episodes: sitting around a table and talking with people who disagree. And finally, Ross recommends some Wild West escapism: “The Ballad of Buster Scruggs,” the Coen brothers’ new anthology movie.Background readingRoss on the G.O.P.’s third-party pipe dream and why Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump resonated in 2016.David on grappling with different political viewpoints and why Democrats need a rural strategy.Michelle on the Working Families Party and the Green Party’s political nihilism versus the Democratic Socialists of America’s political pragmatism“A World of Pain: The Definitive Ranking of Coen Brothers Movies” (The Ringer)I’ve been an Op-Ed columnist since 2009, and I write about politics, religion, pop culture, sociology and the places where they all intersect. I’m a Catholic and a conservative, in that order, which means that I’m against abortion and critical of the sexual revolution, but I tend to agree with liberals that the Republican Party is too friendly to the rich. I was against Donald Trump in 2016 for reasons specific to Donald Trump, but in general I think the populist movements in Europe and America have legitimate grievances and I often prefer the populists to the “reasonable” elites. I’ve written books about Harvard, the G.O.P., American Christianity and Pope Francis; I’m working on one about decadence. Benedict XVI was my favorite pope. I review movies for National Review and have strong opinions about many prestige television shows. I have three small children, two girls and a boy, and I live in New Haven with my wife.I’ve been an Op-Ed columnist at The New York Times since 2017, writing mainly about politics, ideology and gender. These days people on the right and the left both use “liberal” as an epithet, but that’s basically what I am, though the nightmare of Donald Trump’s presidency has radicalized me and pushed me leftward. I’ve written three books, including one, in 2006, about the danger of right-wing populism in its religious fundamentalist guise. (My other two were about the global battle over reproductive rights and, in a brief detour from politics, about an adventurous Russian émigré who helped bring yoga to the West.) I love to travel; a long time ago, after my husband and I eloped, we spent a year backpacking through Asia. Now we live in Brooklyn with our son and daughter.I’ve worked at The Times since 1999 and have been an Op-Ed columnist since 2016. I caught the journalism bug a very long time ago — first as a little kid in the late 1970s who loved reading the Boston Globe sports section and later as a teenager working on my high school and college newspapers. I discovered that when my classmates and I put a complaint in print, for everyone to see, school administrators actually paid attention. I’ve since worked as a metro reporter at The Washington Post and a writer at Businessweek magazine. At The Times, I started as a reporter in the business section and have also been a Times Magazine staff writer, the Washington bureau chief and the founding editor of The Upshot.My politics are left of center. But I’m also to the right of many Times readers. I think education reform has accomplished a lot. I think two-parent families are good for society. I think progressives should be realistic about the cultural conservatism that dominates much of this country. Most of all, however, I worry deeply about today’s Republican Party, which has become dangerously extreme. This country faces some huge challenges — inequality, climate change, the rise of China — and they’ll be very hard to solve without having both parties committed to the basic functioning of American democracy.Tune in on iTunes, Google Play, Spotify, Stitcher or wherever you listen to podcasts. Tell us what you think at argument@nytimes.com. Follow Michelle Goldberg (@michelleinbklyn), Ross Douthat (@DouthatNYT) and David Leonhardt (@DLeonhardt) on Twitter. This week’s show is produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media, with help from Caitlin Pierce. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn. We had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett, Ian Prasad Philbrick and Mikayla Bouchard. Our theme is composed by Allison Leyton-Brown.Advertisement