https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/14/us/obama-commutes-sentences-for-46-drug-offenders.html
Obama Commutes Sentences for 46 Drug Offenders - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1181
AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie Hirschfeld Davis and Gardiner HarrisWASHINGTON — President Obama announced Monday that he was commuting the sentences of 46 drug offenders, intensifying a campaign to overhaul the nation’s criminal justice system as he more than doubled the number of nonviolent criminals granted clemency during his time in office.“These men and women were not hardened criminals,” Mr. Obama said in a video released on the White House’s Facebook page, noting that most had been sentenced to at least 20 years, and that 14 had been given life sentences for nonviolent drug offenses. “So their punishments didn’t fit the crime.” “I believe that at its heart, America is a nation of second chances,” the president added, “and I believe these folks deserve their second chance.”Mr. Obama’s action brought the total number of commutations he has issued to 89, exceeding that of any president since Lyndon B. Johnson, who commuted 226 sentences. Mr. Obama has now commuted more sentences than the last four presidents combined.The move came on the eve of a speech by Mr. Obama to the N.A.A.C.P. in Philadelphia, where he plans to outline his proposals for revamping the juvenile and criminal justice systems, including sentencing guidelines, and to call on Congress to act this year. The commutations are also part of a broader effort by the president to use executive power and his influence on Capitol Hill to address racial disparities on a range of fronts, like overtime pay and residential segregation.Mr. Obama personally notified each inmate in a letter that the sentences had been commuted. He said he had chosen them out of the thousands who applied because “you have demonstrated the potential to turn your life around.”“I believe in your ability to prove the doubters wrong, and change your life for the better,” Mr. Obama wrote to the inmates, who will remain in prison until Nov. 10, when their sentences will expire. “So good luck, and godspeed.”The commutations coincide with a second-term push by Mr. Obama to use clemency to correct what he sees as the excesses of the past, when tough-on-crime politicians instituted harsh sentences even for minor crimes. As a result, black and Hispanic men have been disproportionately affected.“What the president is doing is showing the public through his power that there are people who are in jail for nonviolent drug offenses who have something to contribute to society and should not be there,” said Michael Collins, the policy manager at the Drug Policy Alliance. “The drug war has been a war on people of color,” and policies like mandatory minimum sentences “have really decimated these communities.”Responding to a call by the president for the Justice Department to recommend more cases for commutation, the department set criteria last year for who might qualify: generally nonviolent inmates who have served more than 10 years in prison, who have behaved well while incarcerated and who would not have received as lengthy a sentence under today’s sentencing rules.The 46 commutations issued Monday were the most issued in a single day since July 26, 1935, when President Franklin D. Roosevelt commuted 151 sentences, according to data collected by P. S. Ruckman Jr., a scholar who maintains a blog on pardon power and is writing a book on the subject with George Lardner Jr.Still, they reflect just a small fraction of the more than 6,600 petitions submitted to the Justice Department since the administration announced its initiative last year. Some lawyers representing prisoners have complained that the review process has been overwhelmed. The administration has asked Congress for more money for lawyers, and said it was committed to issuing more commutations over the next 18 months.Cynthia W. Roseberry, the project manager of Clemency Project 2014, a coalition of lawyers, law firms and law schools formed to answer the Justice Department’s call, said that she was heartened by Mr. Obama’s action, but that the government and the consortium “have quite a bit of work ahead.”Overhauling the criminal justice system has become a bipartisan venture. Like Mr. Obama, Republicans running for president are calling for systemic changes. Lawmakers from both parties are collaborating on legislation. And the United States Sentencing Commission has revised guidelines for drug offenses, retroactively reducing sentences for more than 9,500 inmates, nearly three-quarters of them black or Hispanic.Mr. Obama signed legislation in 2010 to narrow the discrepancy in sentences for offenses involving crack and powder cocaine. Senators Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, have teamed up on a bill to apply the law’s changes retroactively and to give judges more discretion in determining the penalties.Despite bipartisan enthusiasm for an overhaul of criminal justice laws, some lawmakers criticized Mr. Obama’s move. “Rather than taking a serious look at criminal justice reform, today President Obama chose to engage in publicity stunts and political pandering,” said Representative Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican of Wisconsin, who has been working with Representative Robert C. Scott, Democrat of Virginia, on legislation to revamp the corrections system. Commutations reduce prison terms but do not overturn convictions, while presidential pardons, which do wipe away convictions, are generally given only to those who have already served their sentences. The prisoners whose sentences will be commuted have stories that range from the mundane to the bizarre.Nathaniel Brown of Orange Park, Fla., was sentenced in August 2002 to life in prison after being swept up in a huge federal drug investigation called Operation Triple Threat, which, together with a follow-up inquiry called Operation Old-Timers, led to 95 arrests. Mr. Brown, 20 at the time of his sentencing, was convicted of conspiracy to distribute cocaine.Norman O’Neal Brown of Hyattsville, Md., was indicted in December 1990 after a federal investigation in which an F.B.I. agent passed out tapped phones to drug dealers in exchange for drugs. In one recorded conversation, Mr. Brown told a co-defendant whose car had been found by the F.B.I. with a pound of cocaine inside to call the police and say the car had been stolen while he was playing basketball in a bad neighborhood. Mr. Brown was given a life sentence.Steven D. Donovan of Wisconsin was indicted in 1992 after being recruited by his brother to buy Colombian cocaine from a supplier in Florida and distribute it in the Milwaukee area. The ring was broken up after Mr. Donovan’s girlfriend, who had quit the business after becoming pregnant, began providing the Internal Revenue Service with information about his drug selling.An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to the number of commutations issued by President Lyndon B. Johnson. It was 226, not 80.Peter Baker contributed reporting.Advertisement