https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/02/arts/music/maren-morris-hero-review.html
Review: Why ‘Hero’ Is an Outstanding Country Music Debut - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1214
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon Caramanica“Hero”(Columbia Nashville)Maren Morris curses. Which shouldn’t be remarkable, but is.Profanities — well, really just one — are sprinkled throughout “Hero,” this 26-year-old singer and songwriter’s outstanding major label debut album, and perhaps the canniest country record in recent memory.Think of all the ways dissenters have tried to upend country in recent years: by sneaking in rhythmic vocal tics learned from rappers, by thinning out the genre’s musical baggage, by pledging inclusive values. Ms. Morris, an astute synthesizer, has studied and perfected them all. “Hero,” as a result, is both utterly of its moment and also savvy enough to indicate how the future might sound.The innovation is clear right from the breakthrough bait-and-switch single “My Church.” It’s a roots-minded song about religiosity but not religion, in which the radio is the church — a move both pious and defiant, in the manner of Kacey Musgraves, without the awww-shucks shrug.The winks continue — a few songs, like “Sugar” and “Drunk Girls Don’t Cry,” suggest Kelsea Ballerini’s light-spirited boys-are-trash anthems, albeit with a few years of men-are-trash experience. And the hilarious “Rich” spins if-I-had-a-dollar heartbreak over a do-nothing man into hip-hop-minded comedy:Boy, I’d be rich, head-to-toe PradaBenz in the driveway, yacht in the waterVegas at the Mandarin, high-roller gamblin’Me and Diddy drippin’ diamonds like MarilynShe’s sing-rapping here, but also blending hip-hop bravado and country modesty (think Chris Janson’s “Buy Me a Boat”), tweaking more literal genre cut-and-pasters like Florida Georgia Line or Sam Hunt by smoothing down the seams.Ms. Morris has a songwriting credit on every song on “Hero,” which she produced with Mike Busbee (known as busbee), a songwriter-producer with a wide résumé across styles. The back half of this album is slightly less ambitious than the first, though even when Ms. Morris is playing it straight, she’s strong, be it on the slow ticktock R&B country of “How It’s Done,” the centrist pop of “Just Another Thing” or “Once,” with gospel and rock flourishes. And “I Could Use a Love Song,” her most conventional country number, is phenomenal, a meditative plaint with clear passion.And then there’s that four-letter word, which comes up time and again: on “Sugar,” on “Rich,” on “Drunk Girls Don’t Cry.” Ms. Morris uses it fluently, casually and effectively, which is to say, you hardly notice at all as she’s breaking what may be country’s last remaining taboo.Advertisement