https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/04/us/politics/ayanna-pressley-massachusetts.html
Ayanna Pressley Upsets Capuano in Massachusetts House Race - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2605
AdvertisementSupported byBy Katharine Q. SeelyeBOSTON — Ayanna Pressley upended the Massachusetts political order on Tuesday, scoring a stunning upset of 10-term Representative Michael Capuano and positioning herself to become the first African-American woman to represent the state in Congress.Ms. Pressley’s triumph was in sync with a restless political climate that has fueled victories for underdogs, women and minorities elsewhere this election season, and it delivered another stark message to the Democratic establishment that newcomers on the insurgent left were unwilling to wait their turn. Ms. Pressley propelled her candidacy with urgency, arguing that in the age of Trump, “change can’t wait.”Her victory carried echoes of the surprise win in June by Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who trounced a longtime House incumbent, Joseph Crowley, in New York. Ms. Pressley is also among several African-American progressives who beat expectations, and in some cases performed far better than polling projections; they include Stacey Abrams of Georgia, Andrew Gillum of Florida and Ben Jealous of Maryland, who each won the Democratic Party’s nominations for governor.There is no Republican on the November ballot in this storied Boston-based district, which was once represented by John F. Kennedy and is one of the most left leaning in the country.[Read our earlier profile of Ms. Pressley.]Addressing jubilant supporters at a union hall in Dorchester Tuesday night, Ms. Pressley said: “It seems like change is on the way.”Speaking in abnormally hushed tones, in contrast to her fiery and impassioned style on the campaign trail, she told supporters “we have together ushered in something incredible.”“People who feel seen and heard for the first time in their lives, a stakehold in democracy and a promise for our future,” she said. “That is the real victory, that is bigger than any electoral victory. And I want to thank you all for being foot soldiers in this movement and for ushering in this change.”Mr. Capuano conceded with barely 13 percent of the votes counted, saying: “I’m sorry it didn’t work out, but this is life, and this is O.K. America’s going to be O.K. Ayanna Pressley is going to be a good congresswoman, and I will tell you that Massachusetts will be well served.” Soon afterward, The Associated Press pronounced Ms. Pressley the winner.Ms. Pressley, who in 2009 became the first black woman elected to the Boston City Council, overcame a powerful lineup of the Massachusetts political establishment. Mr. Capuano, 66, who has held the seat for 20 years, was endorsed by almost every major political figure, including Mayor Martin J. Walsh of Boston, who deployed his extensive political machine on Tuesday on Mr. Capuano’s behalf.“This is a big wake-up call to any incumbent on the ballot in November,” said Mary Anne Marsh, a Boston-based Democratic strategist. “We’ve been in a change election cycle for years. But Trump may have opened the door for all these young candidates, women, people of color, because voters want the antithesis of him.”Ms. Pressley’s win, the margin of victory, and the historic nature of her candidacy are sure to reverberate throughout Boston, a city whose fraught racial history is baked into its national reputation. Ms. Pressley said Democrats throughout the state discouraged her from running against Mr. Capuano, and John Lewis, the civil rights legend and longtime Georgia congressman, held a campaign event for him in May. Yet Ms. Pressley rode a strong turnout among Boston’s minority communities toward history.Her slogan, “change can’t wait,” was a nod to those who said her candidacy was disrupting the traditional order of Boston politics, she said. It was also a rallying cry for the state’s only minority-majority district — that it should have a representative who mirrors the community’s diversity.Political observers said the win was the biggest sign yet that a “new Boston” was emerging in the shadow of the city’s historically white, union-driven political establishment. This new electorate is powered by minorities, immigrants and young college students who have flocked to the city’s start-ups and tech-friendly industries.“It felt like a good time to give someone who’s not a white male a shot,” said Linus Falck-Ytter, 26, a software developer, after voting in Cambridge. “And I liked that she’s more outspoken about helping underrepresented communities.”Primary races for Congress in the state’s all-Democratic delegation are exceedingly rare, and Ms. Pressley, long perceived as one of her party’s rising stars, had shocked the Democratic establishment in January when she announced she was taking on the 10-term incumbent.Only two of the state’s nine House members are women, and one is retiring. It was not until 2012 that Massachusetts elected its first woman — Elizabeth Warren — to the Senate. It has never elected a female governor.Two other female House candidates fell short in their efforts to unseat entrenched incumbents. In the First District, which covers much of Western Massachusetts, Representative Richard Neal defeated a challenge from Tahirah Amatul-Wadud, a black Muslim and civil rights lawyer. If the Democrats take the House, Mr. Neal is poised to become chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.In the Eighth District, in South Boston and parts of the South Shore, Representative Stephen Lynch beat back a challenge from Brianna Wu, a video game developer.State Representative Geoff Diehl won the three-way Republican primary for the United States Senate, and in November will face Elizabeth Warren, who had no Democratic primary opponent. Mr. Diehl has been an outspoken supporter of President Trump.In the governor’s race, Gov. Charlie Baker, a popular Republican, defeated Scott Lively, a far-right pastor. He will face Jay Gonzalez, a cabinet official for former Gov. Deval Patrick, who won the Democratic primary.But perhaps one of Ms. Pressley’s biggest obstacles was Mr. Capuano’s liberal voting record, which denied her the chance to paint a stark ideological contrast with him. A reliable progressive vote, he was an early advocate of sanctuary cities, opposed the Iraq War and the Patriot Act and sat out Mr. Trump’s inauguration. Over time he funneled millions of dollars home for much-needed transit, housing and health care projects.“The idea that she could win by out-liberaling a liberal is the most interesting,” said James Manley, who spent more than 20 years as an aide in the United States Senate, including with former Senator Edward M. Kennedy.Ms. Pressley and Mr. Capuano readily agreed they would likely vote the same way most of the time, leaving Ms. Pressley instead to shape her candidacy into a broad, multifaceted call for change.She argued that the needs of the district had changed over time and that the overwhelming “hate” coming from the White House required more than simply voting the right way. Battling Mr. Trump and overcoming longstanding economic and racial inequities required an entire movement, she said, suggesting she was better positioned than Mr. Capuano to spearhead that effort with what she called “activist leadership.”Moreover, she argued that her life experience — her father struggled with drug addiction and was incarcerated for most of her youth, and she is a survivor of sexual assault — better prepared her to help people who have lived through trauma and other struggles. Perhaps the defining line of her stump speech was this: “The people closest to the pain should be closest to the power.”Mary MacDonald, 49, a biotech researcher who voted for Ms. Pressley in Cambridge, said Ms. Pressley “represents a perspective that Congress is lacking and that resonates with me. As a woman of color, she understands my concerns, as a lesbian. Capuano has done a great job for the district, but he doesn’t get it.”Mr. Capuano, who had not faced a serious challenge since he first won the seat in 1998, conceded he was out of practice in confronting a competitive race, or, as he told WGBH, “there was some rust on the machinery.”Nonetheless, he quickly lined up a formidable array of establishment endorsements. They included Mr. Walsh, Mr. Lewis and Mr. Patrick; the latter two are both black, which seemed to undercut Ms. Pressley’s argument that she better reflected the district.But Ms. Pressley was not without her backers. Most notably, she had the support of Maura Healey, the state’s popular attorney general, who had also bucked the establishment when she won her race in 2014, as well as Michelle Wu, the first woman of color to serve as president of the Boston City Council.The fact that the state’s two Senators — Ms. Warren and Edward Markey — remained neutral in the race was seen as a win for Ms. Pressley.And Ms. Pressley worked hard to activate the more diverse voters of what some call “new Boston.” This includes the black voters of Boston neighborhoods such as Roxbury, Jamaica Plain and Dorchester, but also includes the college students who may have sat out past elections.Though Ms. Pressley has linked herself with other insurgent candidates such as Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, she has a much longer legislative history. As a member of the council, she notched legislative successes including a sweeping reform of the city’s liquor licenses, and she led the effort to update the policy for pregnant and parenting teenagers in Boston Public Schools.Ms. Pressley also created a City Council committee specifically focused on the needs of women and girls.Even as she celebrated her victory, Ms. Pressley delivered a stern warning to her own party and a fierce cri de coeur of the progressive left.“With our rights under assault, with our freedoms under siege, it’s not just good enough to see the Democrats back in power, but it matters who those Democrats are,” she said.She lacerated Mr. Trump as “a racist, misogynistic, truly empathy-bankrupt man,” but said that some of the policies that have created economic inequities in the district were put in place when Democrats were in the White House and in control of Congress.“Change isn’t waiting any longer,” she declared. “We have arrived, change is coming and the future belongs to all of us.”Astead Herndon contributed reportingAdvertisement