https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/03/t-magazine/art-party-derrick-adams-mickalene-thomas.html
An Art Party, With Dancing (Really!) - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1177
AdvertisementSupported by11 PhotosView Slide Show ›By Jenna MarottaEach year, the artists Derrick Adams and Mickalene Thomas, who met as undergraduate students at Pratt in the ’90s, celebrate their January 28 birthday together. “He’s been a friend and is an inspiration — he’s like a brother to me,” Thomas said last night, when they — unofficially, belatedly — marked this year’s occasion with the Fair Trade dance party in the basement of the Wyndham Garden Chinatown. (They also had a proper, timelier dinner at the Beatrice Inn in January.)Beneath the subterranean Wu Room’s red lanterns, they welcomed hundreds of creatives, curators, dealers, gallerists, students and art enthusiasts, many wearing hats, bold prints and statement-emblazoned accessories. “They’ve got to get the music pumped up,” Thomas said around 11 p.m. “You tell that D.J. he better get these people dancing.”Both Adams and Thomas have reasons to ring in this Armory Week by cutting a rug. Yesterday at Pier 90, the invitational fair Volta NY unveiled an exhibition curated by Adams called “Something I Can Feel.” Meanwhile, Thomas’s collection of photographs at Aperture Gallery in Chelsea, “Muse: Mickalene Thomas Photographs and tête-à-tête,” will be on display through mid-March. For “tête-à-tête,” Thomas rotates through a cluster of artworks that have galvanized her to make her own art, including a piece by Adams. “I think what’s familiar about our work is how we conceptually decide to use the black body based on our experiences to really exemplify the diversity within an African-American community, to show that we all have our different voices within one group to express our own identity,” Thomas said. “And I think that’s what makes the work really powerful, because it’s all coming from a similar place, but it’s sort of branched off in different directions.”When midnight loomed and feet were planted firmly on the ground, Adams explained why this wasn’t just another frivolous excuse to indulge. “We don’t need an art party, we need a dance party,” he declared. “For me, this is as important as the art fair. The part of community is equally important, if not more important, than the commerce part of the art.”According to an ecstatic follow-up email the next day from D.J. April Hunt, who performed the third and final set (which wrapped early in the morning, and included Three 6 Mafia’s “Sippin on Syrup,” Missy Elliott’s “All n My Grill” and Claudja Barry’s “Love For the Sake of Love”), “People finally danced! Art world folks need like five drinks to get loose.”Advertisement