https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/09/realestate/can-my-upstairs-neighbor-really-make-this-much-noise.html
Can My Upstairs Neighbor Really Make This Much Noise? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
521
AdvertisementSupported byAsk Real EstateNew Yorkers are expected to tolerate quite a racket, but there are limits — and laws. By Ronda KaysenQ: My upstairs neighbor in my Upper West Side co-op uses a treadmill every night for 45 minutes, causing vibrations and thumping in my apartment. When I complained to him, he said he’d put a mat beneath it. If he has, I haven’t noticed the difference. Co-op rules prohibit using loud equipment after 10 p.m., and he stops just at the curfew. I spoke with the managing agent who said he couldn’t tell my neighbor to stop using the equipment, but would write him a note. He also said I couldn’t inform the board. Is this true? And is my neighbor allowed to make this much noise just because it’s before 10 p.m.?A: Neighbors make noise and annoy each other. As New Yorkers, we’re expected to tolerate a lot of it. But there are limits, even if the noise occurs before a 10 p.m. curfew. Is your neighbor crossing a line and violating your warranty of habitability, a state rule? It’s possible, but someone other than you needs to hear it to find out.Since your managing agent is not being helpful, go around him. You are allowed to talk to your co-op board about problems in the building, regardless of what he says. If anything, his response is something the board should know about. “Having a property manager who flat-out ignores the complaints of shareholders is not in the best interests of all shareholders,” said Ingrid C. Manevitz, a real estate lawyer and partner at the Manhattan law firm Schwartz Sladkus Reich Greenberg Atlas.Boards are often reluctant to get in the middle of disputes between neighbors (which may explain your managing agent’s response). But if the noise is truly unreasonable, the board could address the problem. Many co-ops require shareholders to cover 80 percent of their floors with carpets. That could help. So could soundproofing.Since your neighbor has a regular workout routine, a board member should visit your apartment at that hour and listen. If the board is as unhelpful as the managing agent, you may want to hire a noise consultant who, for a substantial fee, could take sound-level readings and “determine if the sound is truly unreasonable and disturbing, or if the resident is unduly sensitive,” said Alan Fierstein, the president of Acoustilog, an acoustical consulting service. With this information, you’d have a stronger case to convince management to act.For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.Advertisement