https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/28/opinion/anthony-kennedy-retirement-supreme-court.html
Opinion | A Supreme Court for the Powerful - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1057
AdvertisementSupported byBy David LeonhardtOpinion ColumnistThis article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive the newsletter each weekday.Anthony Kennedy’s retirement is “the most consequential event in American jurisprudence at least since Bush v. Gore in 2000 and probably since Roe v. Wade in 1973,” writes Jack Goldsmith, a legal scholar and former George W. Bush administration official, in The Washington Post.Kennedy was quite conservative on many issues, including business regulation and campaign finance, and on those issues, his departure will have little immediate effect. Conservative positions will continue to win a lot of 5-4 decisions, as they did in the court term that ended this week.But Kennedy was moderate to liberal on other issues, including several that particularly affect the rights of women and minorities. On these issues, his departure could quickly lead to big changes in American life.In the simplest terms, the Supreme Court is likely to begin siding more often with those who already have power — and against those who don’t have much. After decades of rising economic inequality and consolidation, it is a profoundly worrisome development.You’ve probably already read a lot of discussion of Kennedy’s retirement. So I want to use today’s newsletter to cut through the noise and attempt to provide clarity on a few major questions: Can the Democrats prevent Kennedy’s replacement from being seated before the midterm election? Almost certainly not.Democratic senators were right to call on the Republicans to wait to confirm a justice until after this year’s elections, given the Republicans’ unprecedented refusal to let President Barack Obama fill a court opening in 2016. But Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, has already made clear that he will ignore the Democrats. And a majority of senators can do just about anything it wants in the chamber. The Republicans currently have 51 of the 100 seats, as well as a tiebreaking vote, when needed, from the vice president.Richard Hasen, writing in Slate, suggests that liberals have one hope, slim though it may be: Huge public protests to put pressure on Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski — two moderate, pro-choice Republican senators — not to confirm a nominee who threatens abortion rights.Which issues are most likely to be affected in the near future?All signs suggest that President Trump will choose a nominee significantly more conservative than Kennedy. In that case, the new justice could provide the deciding vote in rulings that:- restrict the Environmental Protection Agency from fighting climate change- allow states to outlaw abortion- ban race-based affirmative action-  uphold capital punishment and solitary confinement- limit consumers’ digital privacy rights- aggravate partisan gerrymandering- allow states to outlaw same-sex marriage“The difference between a court with Justice Kennedy and one with a Trump-chosen replacement for him,” writes The Times’s Emily Bazelon, “is likely to be the difference between incremental and drastic change in crucial areas of law, between baby steps and giant ones.”What can you do if you’re alarmed about all of this?Get more involved in politics, as The Times editorial board argues.Big soda vs. your health. Lost amid all the attention on the Supreme Court is a deeply alarming story from California: The soda industry seems to be persuading state legislators there to prohibit local communities from passing soda taxes.It’s a terrible idea. The evidence shows that soda taxes improve public health, without harming the poor — because people respond by drinking less soda. Just about the only people hurt by soda taxes are those who work for the soda industry. By trying to ban taxes, the industry is putting its profits above your health.For more, read Daniel Borenstein in The Mercury News or Anahad O’Connor and Margot Sanger-Katz in The Times.You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).Advertisement