http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/10/dining/corsican-wines-antoine-arena-speak-a-language-of-their-own.html
Corsican Wines Speak a Language of Their Own - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1982
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovPATRIMONIO, France — Antoine Arena was a promising law student in Paris in 1975 when the Corsican independence movement took a violent turn.Hearing of armed battles between France and secessionists, Mr. Arena decided to quit law school. In protest, he would return to this small village in the northeast of Corsica, where his family had lived for generations. He would grow grapes and make wine.“Everyone thought I was crazy,” Mr. Arena recalled as we walked along the steep slope of his Carco Vineyard last month. To the south in the distance, snowcapped mountains loomed. To the west, the cool blue Mediterranean beckoned. The sinuous Corsican coastline is among the most beautiful in the world, but almost no place on the island is immune from the baleful stare of the mountains.“After I quit law studies, my father didn’t talk to me for a month,” Mr. Arena continued. “Nobody believed in viticulture. The only ones who stayed in viticulture were the ones who couldn’t succeed anywhere else.”From that unpromising beginning, Mr. Arena went on to become a godfather of Corsican wine. Along with a few other influential pioneers, like Christian Imbert of Domaine de Torraccia and Jean-Charles Abbatucci of Domaine Comte Abbatucci, Mr. Arena has helped make Corsica one of the most exciting and distinctive wine regions in the world.What makes Corsican wine so unusual? For one thing, the island culture shapes both the personality of the wine and the character of the winemakers. Corsica offers a melting pot of soils: limestone and clay primarily in the north, granite mostly in the south, sandstone and volcanic soils in the center. The climate is both maritime and continental, heavily influenced by the mountains. Winds are constant, including the famous Mistral from the northwest and the hot Sirocco from the south, countering the dampening effect of frequent sudden rains. And the people? Proud, fierce and independent barely begins to describe them.“Corsica is very complicated,” said Yves Canarelli of Clos Canarelli, who makes pure precise wines from Figari and Bonifacio in the south. “It is French, but it is not. First we are Corsican, then we are French. When you’re an island, you think differently than the continent.”This tension plays out endlessly on the island, where road signs are written in French and Corsican, but the French is habitually spray-painted over. And it’s evident in Corsica’s host of indigenous grapes, which bear a close genetic resemblance to mainland Italian and French grapes yet offer completely different expressions.Niellucciu, the leading red grape in the north, is genetically identical to sangiovese, but Mr. Arena’s Morta Maio Patrimonio Rouge, 100 percent niellucciu, tastes like no Chianti. It’s a complex aromatic feast of red fruit and earth, pure, energetic and graceful, with streaks of flowers, herbs and minerals and a touch of funk.In the south, the leading red grape is sciaccarellu, a facsimile of mammolo, a grape generally used for blending in central Italy. On Corsica, though, it is known for its elegance and complexity — “Corsican pinot noir,” in the words of Sébastien Poly of Domaine U Stiliccionu, who farms about 17 acres outside of Ajaccio in the south. His 2012 Damianu, made entirely of sciaccarellu, is simply beautiful, a savory mouthful of red fruit flavors you don’t want to stop drinking.All over Corsica, the major white grape is vermentinu, which, of course, is Corsican for vermentino (known also as rolle in southern France). Corsican vermentinu tastes nothing like mainland versions. The 2010 Granit Blanc from Domaine de Vaccelli, not far from U Stiliccionu, is a precise, lip-smacking, stony mouthful, while the 2009 Blanc from Clos Venturi, in the interior of the island near Corte, is voluminous and rich, yet with a lovely mineral tang. From the north, on a granite-and-clay plateau overlooking Calvi, Camille-Anaïs Raoust of Domaine Maestracci makes a fresh, lightly smoky, deliciously austere vermentinu called E Prove Blanc.Over the last 40 years or so, leading vignerons have made it a priority to recover indigenous Corsican grapes that had been considered lost to the ages. Here and there you can find a few exceptional bottles of a rare white, biancu gentile, like Clos Canarelli’s 2014, fermented in concrete eggs from grapes grown near Figari in the south. It tastes like a blast of fresh citrus, punctuated by a welcome bitterness. In the north, in a different part of Patrimonio from Mr. Arena, Yves Leccia makes a softer, more linear, complex biancu gentile.Abbatucci makes a highly unusual white wine of the pink-tinged barbarossa grape, slightly bitter and with a raspy texture, yet thoroughly compelling. Other old grapes that vignerons are beginning to work with again include genovese, codivarta, carcaghjolu (both biancu and neru) and riminese. No matter what the grape, all the wines seem to go beautifully with the Corsican cuisine, which can range from delicate seafood to hearty roasted lamb and wild boar stews and almost always includes exquisite charcuterie and cheeses.“We have 40 different varieties, and we’re still discovering more,” said Mr. Imbert, the proprietor of Torraccia for more than 50 years. In 1972, he founded an association of Corsican vignerons dedicated to working with these indigenous grapes.In the middle of the 20th century, the grapes were rarely seen. Though viticulture came to Corsica with the Greeks well before the birth of Christ, the twin disasters of phylloxera, the ravenous aphid that killed European grapevines wholesale at the end of the 19th century, and World War I dealt terrible blows to Corsican viticulture. An estimated 10 percent or more of the Corsican population was killed in World War I, maybe twice the rate as in the rest of France.“It was an utter catastrophe,” Mr. Imbert said. “The fields were emptied. There was nobody to work the land.”Much of the vineyard land back then was in small parcels, tended by farmers who considered grapes just one of many crops. Large-production wine was thought to be powerful, rustic and cheap.“We had a Corsican wine that had great authority and a low price,” Ernest Hemingway wrote in “A Moveable Feast.” “It was a very Corsican wine and you could dilute it by half with water and still receive its message.”The ending of French colonial rule in North Africa in the late 1950s brought thousands of exiles to Corsica. Many turned to wine, planting large vineyards of grapes that were popular in southern France, like carignan, cinsault, grenache and syrah, but had little relation to Corsican culture. High-yielding vineyards in the wrong places with the wrong grapes became the rule. Even into the 1980s, the best Corsican grapes were often unavailable.“When my father began to plant, the nursery was not able to give him what he wanted, so he planted syrah,” said Manu Venturi, whose family makes the excellent Clos Venturi and value-priced Domaine Vico wines. “It wasn’t that interesting, but I think the most beautiful niellucciu can be there.”Since 1980, however, the prevailing movement has been away from cheap high-volume wine to small quantities of exceptional quality. Thousands of acres of mediocre vines have been torn out. The level of quality from the best producers is now superb.“In the last 30 years, it’s been a resurrection,” Mr. Imbert said.Certainly, American sommeliers have noticed. Leading wine lists in New York now seem incomplete without a few Corsican selections. Many top producers have been brought to the United States by Kermit Lynch, the pioneering importer, who first noted the potential of Corsican wines early on in the 1980s.“Things are happening there that no one expected,” he said. “For example, balanced southern wines with freshness and liveliness. You would expect heavy wines, but that’s not the case from the finest domaines.”In Corsica, unless you go to the tourist restaurants, it’s still possible to drink a lot of bad wine. The best bottles, it seems, are exported, to hip wine bars in Paris and Marseille and to other countries, if not to the rest of France.“The French don’t understand our wines, either,” said Gérard Courrèges of Domaine de Vaccelli, who with his father, Alain, has been tearing out the southern French grapes planted by his grandfather in favor of indigenous varieties.The energy and passion of younger vignerons like Mr. Courrèges is palpable throughout the island. Mr. Poly of U Stiliccionu works biodynamically, farming his 17 acres virtually by himself. Mr. Courrèges works organically, as does Marc Imbert at Torraccia, who is taking over from his father and says, “We’re trying to work in a traditional peasant way, like before the wars.” Ms. Raoust at Domaine Maestracci is pushing to work biodynamically, although she has yet to receive the support of her father, Michel Raoust, from whom she took over several years ago.Mr. Arena himself has ceded winemaking duties to his sons, Antoine-Marie and Jean-Baptiste.“My kids have added finesse to the wines,” he said. “I used to make them too heavy.”But he continues to speak up for Corsican culture as expressed through the wines.“Because we are in Corsica, we can do things that don’t conform to standard formulas,” he said. “We are rich because we have differences. But don’t confuse unity with uniformity.”Here are nine excellent Corsican producers worth seeking out in restaurants and retail shops.DOMAINE COMTE ABBATUCCI Superb, startlingly pure wines from the Ajaccio region. (Kermit Lynch Wine Merchant, Berkeley, Calif.)ANTOINE ARENA Wines of great character from Patrimonio. (Kermit Lynch Wine Merchant)CLOS CANARELLI Precise southern wines from the ever-experimental Yves Canarelli. (Kermit Lynch Wine Merchant)YVES LECCIA Pure, meticulous Patrimonio wines. (Kermit Lynch Wine Merchant)DOMAINE MAESTRACCI Lovely, graceful blended reds and vermentinus. (Kermit Lynch Wine Merchant)DOMAINE DE TORRACCIA Fresh, refreshing wines from the Porto Vecchio region. (V.O.S. Selections, New York)U STILICCIONU Exceptionally drinkable, savory wines from Ajaccio. (Grand Cru Selections, New York)DOMAINE DE VACCELLI Inviting wines with great finesse from Ajaccio. (Thomas Calder Selection/Moonlight Wine, New York)DOMAINE VICO/CLOS VENTURI Twin estates from the center of Corsica; good values from Vico, exceptional vermentinus from Venturi. (Wineberry, New York)Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.Advertisement