https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/12/dining/why-cant-you-find-that-wine.html
Why Can’t You Find That Wine? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
567
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovOften plaintive and occasionally hostile, the missives arrive regularly by email, snail mail and phone: “You have an uncanny ability to discuss wines that are difficult if not impossible to find,” one California reader wrote in June.And this from a reader in New York: “Once again, I have wasted more than a half-hour trying (in vain) to find where in New York City to buy wines mentioned in your column.”It all adds up to anguish on the part of readers. When the search proves fruitless, they are left with a sour taste in their mouths, instead of an unusual wine. There are two reasons for their frustration: First, wine distribution in the United States is regulated by an irrational patchwork of laws, and second, small producers often create wines that are more intriguing and distinctive but less available. Internet tools and apps can help, but they can’t solve the problem. Nonetheless, consumers can take steps to increase their odds.I fervently wish all drinkers could find what they want. I sympathize with those who can’t. But the simple solution — choosing only wines that are easy to find — is worse than the problem.If only it weren’t so complicated. While the readership of The New York Times is global, wine distribution in the United States is splintered into 50 different systems, one for every state. Importers and distributors who do business in, say, New York and New Jersey, may not work in Ohio or Missouri. Or they may sell wine in great New York City shops like Chambers Street Wines, Flatiron Wines & Spirits or Crush Wine & Spirits, but not in shops in northern New Jersey. In Pennsylvania, a state wine board selects the bottles that stores may sell. And in many states, big chains like Costco or Safeway dominate wine sales.As a result, every state, maybe every municipality, offers a different selection. Factor in that wine shops have many different rationales for how they put together their inventories, and you have a complicated Venn diagram with scores of different circles and few points of intersection.Savio Soares, an importer whose company, Savio Soares Selections, works with many small European family estates, said it’s impossible to distribute nationally the small amount of wines he receives. So he restricts his work to seven states.“Even this way, I cannot offer the same producer in all states,” he said.Readers have suggested solutions. “Can’t you publish a short list with local sources?” one asked. But local for whom? Somebody who lives in the Chicago suburbs may find it reasonable to drive 30 minutes to a particular wine shop. But some Upper West Siders become upset if they can’t find the bottle within walking distance on Broadway.Many readers suggest that I write more about wines that are widely available nationally. Such wines abound; for the most part as big, well-known brands, mass-produced and marketed by corporations. But concentrating on these big-brand wines is also a compromise that I don’t wish to make.In December, I wrote about the trend of Champagnes made in the extra-brut style. I recommended 10 bottles based on a tasting by the Dining section’s wine panel. Those wines all turned out to be somewhat obscure. We had three extra-brut Champagnes that were far more widely distributed than our favorites, but we didn’t like those bottles nearly as well. Should we have included them at the expense of wines that were more distinctive and original?My answer is a qualified no. Perhaps it would have been useful to mention these big brands (Laurent-Perrier, Pol Roger and Ayala) so curious readers could sample the style if they wished. But consumers want our favorite wines, not the also-rans. And small-production wines, often made by family estates or the equivalent, are generally far more interesting.I love the way good wine is so different from other beverages. Its production is limited by the agricultural cycle. The variations each year in weather and other conditions make each vintage unique. A good wine is alive, and must be stored and handled carefully to preserve its life. It changes over time, in the glass as it is exposed to air and in the bottle as it ages. While we have learned much about the science of wine in the last century, much is still not understood. Great small producers embrace this sense of mystery. They are not after consistency but instead want their wines to reflect the nuances that make each year, even each moment, singular.Mass-produced wines, for the most part, reflect a vastly different agenda. Their goal is often sameness. Vintage variations are ironed out and wines stabilized so that they can be handled and stored with minimal risk. Many people value this sort of consistency, just as they may prefer to stop at a familiar franchise restaurant rather than seek out an unknown cafe. To each his own.“I want my customers to seek out small-production wines made with integrity, from both imported and domestic producers,” said Jill Bernheimer, a proprietor of Domaine LA, an excellent shop in Los Angeles. “I love when they come in looking for something that is made on a human scale, even if I don’t have it, as it displays a consciousness for wine that is finally coming closer to our understanding of food, the nonindustrial versus the industrial.” My goal is to explore what I think makes wine so thrilling. I’m seeking wines that inspire, with stories to tell and mysteries, perhaps, to conceal. Sometimes deliciousness is enough. But often, the flavors and aromas are only part of what a wine conveys. It’s the rest of the message that’s so fascinating. Part of the joy is for consumers to take part in this journey and make up their own minds. It hurts when they cannot.“If a critic recommends a movie, you know where to go,” one reader wrote last year. “If a critic recommends a restaurant, you know where to go. But wine, where do you go?” I get the message. But films are easy to disseminate widely, regardless of their budgets or aims. The same is true of books or art that can be reproduced.Restaurants are a more apt comparison. When a good restaurant is reviewed, who is actually able to eat there? El Bulli was one of the world’s top restaurants before it closed. Anybody who was interested in food wanted to know what a meal there was like. But access was limited. Some people settled for vicarious pleasure.It’s no different from being fascinated by a review of a noodle shop in Los Angeles, or a tiny barbecue joint in Lexington, Tex., that is open only on Saturday mornings. Most of us will never get there, but we appreciate the artistry of the achievement and hope for a future encounter. Sometimes it’s enough to know what’s possible and to recalibrate our own aesthetic standards accordingly.Luckily, consumers can take steps to aid their search. It’s a lot easier to find an obscure bottle of wine than visit that barbecue joint. For starters, I highly recommend Wine-searcher.com, which can help track down bottles all over the world. You can use it free, but I’ve found the Pro version, requiring a modest annual fee, to be more effective. The Delectable app for mobile phones is primarily a social media tool, but it, too, is useful for tracking down bottles. Other helpful websites and apps include CellarTracker.com, which integrates with Wine-searcher; Winescan.co and Snooth.com. And don’t forget Google.“Our wines are now available in 40 different states through a growing group of generally small, independent distributors,” said Neal Rosenthal, an importer whose wines I have often recommended. “With the research resources available through the Internet, if one is truly curious, most wines can be located.”What can a consumer do when these tools don’t work? Plenty. It begins with finding and establishing a relationship with a good wine shop. And when not every bottle is available, it helps to be open to similar alternatives.“Nine times out of 10, they’ll take a recommendation, especially if they’ve bought wine from us before,” said Craig Heffley, the owner of Wine Authorities, two shops in Raleigh and Durham, N.C., that specialize in small-production wines.While most consumers are understandably interested in immediate gratification, it’s important to think in the long term as well. Be demanding. Continue to ask good merchants for the wines you want. And remember that what’s true today may not be true in a couple of months.A New York reader in December complained that even using Wine-searcher.com, he could not find the Champagne he was seeking. Today, it is carried in four shops in Manhattan and New Jersey.“Consumers should not simply accept a wine merchant’s claim that he or she can’t access the wine,” Mr. Rosenthal said. “Go elsewhere, do some independent research, be curious. It’s unfortunate but sometimes one has to stamp one’s feet.”An earlier version of this article listed the wrong website for Winescan.co. The website is Winescan.co, not Wine-scan.com.Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov. Advertisement