https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/23/books/review/lawrence-wright-god-save-texas.html
The State That Foreshadows America’s Future - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2218
AdvertisementSupported byNonfictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By David OshinskyGOD SAVE TEXAS A Journey Into the Soul of the Lone Star State By Lawrence Wright 349 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $27.95.In 1835, while running for re-election to Congress from Tennessee, the frontiersman Davy Crockett told his constituents that, should he lose, “You may all go to hell, and I will go to Texas.” Narrowly defeated, he made good on his vow, writing his children that he’d found “the garden spot of the world,” the ideal place to settle and seek one’s fortune. Crockett never got to put down roots in Texas — he died two months later defending the Alamo — but his faith in Texas’ exceptionalism, a much-maligned term today, would become a fixture of Lone Star culture. No state can match its swagger or eccentricities; no state generates more loyalty within its borders, or more controversy beyond.If the title of Lawrence Wright’s superb new book, “God Save Texas,” seems a bit clichéd, consider this: A few months ago, long after Wright’s manuscript had gone to press, a district judge in Texas was removed from a case after informing the jury that the Lord had visited him to say the defendant was innocent. Far from apologizing, the judge insisted he had a duty to relay such celestial edicts. “When God tells me I gotta do something, I gotta do it,” he explained.Wright, who won a Pulitzer Prize for “The Looming Tower” and wrote the best-selling “Going Clear,” is a longtime Texas resident now living comfortably in über-liberal Austin, the so-called blue dot in the Red Sea. (Disclaimer: Wright and I occasionally attended the same social events during the 12 years I lived in Austin.) “God Save Texas” is his most personal work yet, an elegant mixture of autobiography and long-form journalism, remarkably free of elitist bias on the one hand, and pithy guidebook pronouncements on the other. For those seeking the joys of line-dancing or the 10 best rib joints in Waco, this is not your book.Wright’s main theme is that, like it or not, America’s future runs through Texas. The state population is on track to double by 2050. Houston, San Antonio and Dallas rank among the nation’s 10 largest cities, with Austin a close 11th. Texas is growing at twice the rate of California, with a G.D.P. larger than most industrialized countries. Politically, this translates into more congressional seats and electoral votes. Texas is on a roll.Big money has attracted world-class museums, restaurants and architecture. Yet the state still scrapes bottom in categories ranging from health care access to educational achievement. One in 10 American children lives in Texas; one Texas child in four lives in poverty.It’s not hard to find the culprit. Texas may not have the most corrupt state government, Wright says, but it clearly has the most dysfunctional. No Democrat has won the governorship since Ann Richards in 1990, or any statewide office since 1994. As the electorate tilted rightward, the door swung open for those pushing an extreme social agenda. The current Texas governor, Greg Abbott, described his previous job as state attorney general this way: “I go into the office in the morning. I sue Barack Obama, and then I go home.” Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick is a former sports announcer who ran Donald Trump’s Texas presidential campaign. Patrick’s self-help primer, modestly titled “The Second Most Important Book You Will Ever Read,” is dedicated to “fulfilling God’s command to make disciples of all men.”Not surprisingly, the business of the Texas Legislature is larded with bills, many of which pass, to defund Planned Parenthood, oppose Medicaid expansion, permit firearms on college campuses, punish sanctuary cities and officially substitute “Merry Christmas” for “Happy Holidays.” Governor Abbott even called the legislature back into special session to push through several measures, but in particular one that he and Patrick crave most: a bathroom bill. Facing serious pushback from worried corporations, it failed, despite Patrick’s claim that Obama favored coed showers in the nation’s schools.The irony, Wright insists, is that Texas should be a solid blue state. Young professionals are pouring in to take high-paying jobs; they tend to vote Democrat. So, too, Hispanics, who will soon compose half the state’s population. The problem is that these groups don’t vote in numbers comparable to older whites and evangelicals, who march dependably to the polls. Taking a page from his acquaintance Karl Rove, Wright notes that Texans have traditionally been more populist than progressive, attracted to conspiracies in which outside forces, scornful of their values, have rigged the game against them. Enter Dan Patrick and Donald Trump.Like many Texas liberals, Wright has a soft spot for the three Texans who reached the White House — a feeling no doubt heightened by his loathing of the present occupant. His description of Lyndon Johnson as a champion of the disadvantaged is standard fare; more intriguing is his appraisal of Johnson’s impact on the state’s public image in the 1960s, as America’s culture czars, especially in Hollywood, consciously soured on Texas following the Kennedy assassination in Dallas and Johnson’s escalation in Vietnam, a war he inherited but soon came to define. Wright is correct, I think, in noting how quickly, and harshly, the policy missteps and personal foibles of this president — his cornpone accent, whopping exaggerations and primitive habits — were linked to the state he came from. “The hatred heaped upon him splattered over the rest of us,” Wright says, adding: “I wouldn’t change my opposition to that war, but I wish we had been kinder to him.”It’s not just the disappearance of Johnson’s New Deal liberalism in Texas that Wright laments, it’s also the rout of moderate Republicanism as practiced by George H.W. and George W. Bush. Whatever their faults, Wright claims, they are men of character who displayed little of the partisan meanness so prevalent today. He also makes a case for George W. Bush as a good governor, more interested in meeting the state’s social needs than in fighting its culture wars. Recently, the younger Bush broke his silence about the toxic environment in Washington, taking an indirect shot at Trump. “As he spoke,” Wright recalls, “I wished for the millionth time that he hadn’t invaded Iraq.”The Bushes could also be unintentionally hilarious, especially when wrestling with their native tongue. Wright fondly weaves in their most egregious gaffes, not to embarrass the former presidents but to humanize them. Take, for example, Bush the elder on Ronald Reagan: “I have worked alongside him. … We have had triumphs. We have made mistakes. We have had sex.” (He meant “setbacks.”) Or Bush the younger describing his presidential campaign: “They misunderestimated me.” Indeed, they did.Perhaps the clearest indication of Wright’s Texas loyalties can be seen in his choice of a burial plot. His sparkling literary credentials have earned him entry into the exclusive Texas State Cemetery in Austin. On the positive side, it’s home to Congresswoman Barbara Jordan, a civil rights icon, whose simple epitaph reads, “Patriot.” Ann Richards and her longtime companion, the revered Texas writer Bud Shrake, also rest there — Richards leaving behind some preachy words about fairness, Shrake taking the more direct route: “So Far, So Bueno.”But much of the cemetery is dotted with less agreeable folk. Buried side-by-side are Governors “Ma” and “Pa” Ferguson — “Ma” becoming the state’s first female chief executive following her husband’s ouster on corruption charges. An early crusader against bilingual education back in the 1920s, she is said to have argued: “If English was good enough for Jesus, it’s good enough for the schoolchildren of Texas.” Rick Perry and Dan Patrick have plots reserved, as do a fair number of their friends. In picking his spot, Wright seems to have chosen nature over neighborliness. It’s set on a shady hillside near the grave of Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston, hero of the Texas Revolution and son of the Confederacy, who died at Shiloh.Wright sees no conflict, nor should there be. Liberal Texans complain and fight and continually lose. Like Wright himself, they sometimes contemplate leaving the state, but not many do. There’s a powerful sense of rootedness, a love of the landscape and the laid-back lifestyle, a selective affinity for the culture, and an Alamo-like pride in battling unwinnable odds. As Wright notes of his grave site, and surely of Texas itself: “I had made my choice.”David Oshinsky is a professor of history at N.Y.U. and the director of the division of medical humanities at N.Y.U. Langone Health. He is the author of “Bellevue: Three Centuries of Medicine and Mayhem at America’s Most Storied Hospital.”Advertisement