http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/28/world/europe/at-an-abandoned-palace-in-ukraine-an-anxious-look-toward-the-future.html
At Abandoned Ukrainian Palace, an Anxious Look Toward the Future - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1618
AdvertisementSupported byBy Steven ErlangerNOVI PETRIVTSI, Ukraine — Arthur Pereverziev is just 24, but he has the calm air of command. Thrown early into politics by the tumultuous decade that began with the Orange Revolution in 2004, he was an instrumental member of the civilian group Vidsich, or Repulse, which opposed the presidency of Viktor F. Yanukovych.Now, after three months at the barricades in Independence Square, Kiev’s central square that is also known as the Maidan, Mr. Pereverziev finds himself in charge of Mr. Yanukovych’s bizarre pleasure palace, here on the Dnieper River outside the capital.As hundreds of Ukrainians wandered agog through the 350-acre grounds of the estate and banged on the windows and gaudy doors of the palace, hoping to be allowed inside, Mr. Pereverziev stood in one of the lavish marbled halls and marveled.“It’s so expensive, and so cheesy,” he finally said. “It was almost too much to be amazed. When you suddenly see such beautiful things in a beautiful setting, that’s one thing. But when a man who has no taste throws everything together, the beautiful and the ridiculous, that’s something else.”Mr. Yanukovych took what was once a simple state-owned guesthouse and transformed it into a gilded mishmash of bad mosaics, valuable icons, leather recliners, suits of armor, expensive chandeliers and toilets that look like golden thrones. Though Mr. Pereverziev expressed contempt for the trappings of such a lifestyle, he is anxious to guard and preserve it all now, because by order of the Ukrainian Parliament, it is once again the property of the state.He was dismayed by the disappearance of some swords and pistols. The contents of the hilltop palace, known as the Mezhyhirya, were photographed and inventoried the first night the group occupied the building, but when he and his exhausted troops slept afterward, they awoke to find 12 items missing. Three of them, he said proudly, have since been found where they had been hidden away.But what really upset him, Mr. Pereverziev said, was the danger that this revolution would be short-circuited the way the 2004 revolution was, by a failure to change the political system and bring in new, younger, cleaner, more cosmopolitan leaders who would be less beholden to Russia and the kleptocracy of the past.“The new people in charge are already making some of the same mistakes, by giving posts to corrupted officials,” he said with some bitterness. “They’re corrupted morons, and everyone knows it.”This time, he thinks, a new Ukrainian generation will not tolerate a repetition of the past with new faces. “We want to change the system, the way of doing politics, not just to end the corruption,” he said. “Ukrainians want to own their own lives, for themselves, and not for the oligarchs and the politicians. After 22 years of independence, we finally want to live like human beings.”For the last two months, Mr. Pereverziev has been the commander of what he called the 16th regiment of the Maidan self-defense forces. He said there were about 40 such “regiments” — with about 100 troops, they are more like companies — created over the past three months, and their commanders are called Sotnyks, an old Cossack rank roughly equivalent to a captain in the Ukrainian army. His wife commands a smaller women’s division.As for Russia, Mr. Pereverziev says he thinks that Moscow’s efforts to meddle in Ukraine “to escalate the situation” will fail, especially given that the Tatars, the ethnic minority indigenous to Crimea, support a united Ukraine. “Russia has nothing to offer us except fuel and energy,” he said. “And in the time of shale gas, soon we won’t need them.”Russia’s political system was a model for Mr. Yanukovych, he said, and will probably share the fallen president’s fate.“This will also finish Russia in the end,” Mr. Pereverziev said, “as an empire, as a kleptocratic state.” From Ukraine, “they stole our identity, our language, our land,” he added. “They called us ‘mali brati,’ ” — little brothers — “but we’re not brothers at all, that’s just propaganda.”His concerns about the future are widely shared here.Ulia Turko, 27, worked for legislators in the Ukrainian Parliament, the Verkhovna Rada, until she had her daughter, Solomia, 10 months ago. “I saw them and heard them in the Verkhovna Rada,” she said, referring to the Parliament, as she wandered among the memorials to the dead in the Maidan on Wednesday. “They don’t care about anyone else.”Ms. Turko also wants better, younger leaders, shaped less by traditional politics than by the experience of the fight for the Maidan and by a more open-minded life.She said she wants Ukraine finally to stand up against the dictatorship of the past and against pressure by outsiders to shape its future. “Russia has no right to interfere here,” she said. “But that’s also true of the countries of the European Union. I think they both want to get their own benefits.”Ms. Turko said the revolution was against the vivid, uncontrolled corruption of Mr. Yanukovych and his “family,” including his suddenly wealthy son, more than it was about any geopolitical question.She watched a procession of mothers winding through the still-smoking barricades of the Maidan, carrying photographs of their dead, each photograph surrounded by a crown of thorns, mixing cries of “Glory to the heroes!” with patriotic songs.“We would like Russia we would like everyone — to understand how we feel,” Ms. Turko said. “We want to be free.”At the Yanukovych palace, Mr. Pereverziev said he was ready to fight again, if necessary, for lasting change. “We’ll fight the new power, too, in the future, if it’s anything like the previous one,” he said.Advertisement