https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/05/us/politics/michael-bloomberg-2020.html
Michael Bloomberg Will Not Run for President in 2020 - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
289
AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexander BurnsMichael R. Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor who joined the Democratic Party last year to crusade against President Trump, announced he would not seek the White House himself in 2020, discarding plans to mount a maverick campaign that would have tested the party’s openness to a wealthy centrist with a chameleon-like approach to partisan politics.Mr. Bloomberg’s decision appears to reflect a recognition of the long odds he would have faced as a moderate newcomer in an unapologetically liberal party, and his own unsentimental calculus about the trade-offs involved in running. After conducting polling and other research, Mr. Bloomberg’s advisers concluded he would have a real but narrow path to the nomination — and that it could all but vanish if Joseph R. Biden Jr., the former vice president, entered the race.“I believe I would defeat Donald Trump in a general election,” Mr. Bloomberg wrote, in a Bloomberg News column announcing his decision. “But I am clear-eyed about the difficulty of winning the Democratic nomination in such a crowded field.”[Make sense of the people, issues and ideas shaping American politics with our newsletter.]Though Mr. Bloomberg is aligned with Democrats on a range of issues like climate change and gun violence, he is also a proudly pro-business centrist in a party that has moved sharply to the left in its rhetoric and policy proposals. And his record on policing as mayor, as well as his generally favorable view of Wall Street, would likely have proven troublesome in a field that is establishing litmus tests on social justice and corporate power.In his column, Mr. Bloomberg cautioned Democrats not to shift too far to the left.“It’s essential that we nominate a Democrat who will be in the strongest position to defeat Donald Trump and bring our country back together,” he wrote. “We cannot allow the primary process to drag the party to an extreme that would diminish our chances in the general election and translate into ‘Four More Years.’”Rather than entering the race himself, Mr. Bloomberg intends to plow his political energy and immense personal fortune into other efforts to thwart Mr. Trump and his agenda, including an initiative aimed at rapidly accelerating the country’s transition to renewable energy. He also expects to be heavily involved in the 2020 general election, organizing and financing opposition to Mr. Trump.Mr. Bloomberg, 77, notified advisers of his decision on Monday, capping months of exhaustive research into the possibility of running as a Democrat. Polling and focus groups found that Mr. Bloomberg had a path to the Democratic nomination, his advisers said, but that he would likely struggle to compete if Mr. Biden were to run.By removing himself from consideration, Mr. Bloomberg may have the effect of increasing the pressure on Mr. Biden to announce a campaign in the coming weeks. The two men have been the most prominent moderates contemplating the 2020 Democratic primary, a contest largely defined so far by candidates well to their left, most notably Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.Without Mr. Bloomberg joining the fray, armed with his personal wealth and a fearsome political operation, Mr. Biden now stands apart in his evident ability to wage a strong campaign on comparatively centrist terms.In the column announcing his plans, Mr. Bloomberg said he had resolved that his time and resources would be better spent campaigning for his favorite causes than pursuing an underdog candidacy. In addition to his new climate campaign, called Beyond Carbon, Mr. Bloomberg said he would redouble his efforts to enact gun-control regulations around the country.“I know there’s much more we can accomplish over the next two years, but only if we stay focused on the work and expand upon it,” Mr. Bloomberg said. “And the fact is: a national presidential campaign would limit my ability to do that.”Mr. Bloomberg’s announcement ends the latest of several efforts he has made to pursue the presidency, stretching back a dozen years, and likely marks a final abandonment of his longstanding ambition to capture the White House. Instead, he appears poised to fully embrace his slow-motion transformation into one of the principal financial and organizational backers of the Democratic Party.Mr. Bloomberg came close to running for president in 2016 as an independent candidate, but ultimately concluded that only the nominee of a major party could win.[Follow the Democratic presidential field with our candidate tracker.]Mr. Bloomberg and his advisers studied the presidential landscape for months, conducting national and state-level polling and holding focus groups with voters around the country. They concluded that he would have had significant strengths even in a crowded Democratic race, including his biography as a self-made entrepreneur and his extraordinary stature as a philanthropist.Mr. Bloomberg was so serious in his considerations that he had begun discussing with aides how he would structure operations in the White House, including the possibility of implementing the same bullpen-style office space he used at City Hall in the East Wing. He had three different teams of advisers briefing him on foreign, defense and domestic policy, with the latter led by Bruce Reed, a former chief of staff to Mr. Biden, according to a Bloomberg adviser.But there were also neon-lit warning signs for Mr. Bloomberg, an avowed technocrat who was first elected mayor as a Republican in 2001. Populist liberals, including Mr. Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, have framed their candidacies around opposing the influence of money in politics — arguments that might have stung Mr. Bloomberg with particular force.So, too, might the scrutiny facing the wider field of Democratic candidates on the issue of criminal justice policy. Other contenders, including Mr. Biden and Senator Kamala Harris of California, have been pushed onto the defensive for having pursued traditional tough-on-crime policies in the past. As mayor of New York, Mr. Bloomberg supported stop-and-frisk policing, which was found to target black and Hispanic people disproportionately.In a September interview, Mr. Bloomberg expressed no regret about employing aggressive policing tactics as mayor, and questioned whether many of the allegations arising as a result of #MeToo deserved to be believed. He described his emerging identity as a Democrat as something of a default choice, citing his support for abortion rights.“It’s impossible to conceive that I could run as a Republican — things like choice, so many of the issues, I’m just way away from where the Republican Party is today,” Mr. Bloomberg said.Where Mr. Bloomberg has aligned most cleanly with Democrats has been his contempt for Mr. Trump, whom he has described routinely as divisive and incompetent. After endorsing Hillary Clinton for president in 2016, Mr. Bloomberg threw his political clout wholly behind Democrats in the 2018 midterm elections, spending about $112 million to lift the party and dedicating most of that sum to seizing control of the House.Mr. Bloomberg has been welcomed into the top ranks of the Democratic Party with open arms. On Tuesday, both Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic minority leader, praised Mr. Bloomberg in glowing language.Mr. Schumer said he was “a great mayor and would have been a strong candidate,” while Ms. Pelosi said his candidacy would have been an “important addition to the discussion about how we go forward as a country.”In a boon to Democrats, Mr. Bloomberg is expected to keep intact the political operation he assembled for a presidential race, which includes a number of former top advisers to President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, and to deploy it instead on a project to help build Democratic infrastructure for the party’s eventual nominee.David Plouffe, Mr. Obama’s 2008 campaign manager, confirmed in an interview that he had been lending advice to Mr. Bloomberg about an outside-spending effort aimed at helping Democrats overcome Mr. Trump’s organizational and technological advantages.“I think there are huge gaps that need to be filled, and this Bloomberg effort has a chance to be an important — or the important — ingredient,” Mr. Plouffe said.The electoral component of Mr. Bloomberg’s agenda, however, is less defined at this than his plans for climate advocacy. His policy advisers are in the process of drawing up a proposal for hastening the United States’ transition away from all carbon energy, and they plan to release the details soon.Carl Pope, an adviser to Mr. Bloomberg, said the draft plan involves eliminating coal power outright by 2030 and massive initiatives to electrify transit infrastructure and buildings, as well as ambitious scientific research projects.Mr. Pope said the plan would differ substantially from the Green New Deal, a climate proposal backed by liberal Democrats in Congress, because Mr. Bloomberg’s alternative was not also focused on expanding the economic safety net.Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts, a champion of the Green New Deal legislation, called Mr. Bloomberg’s announcement “a huge infusion of energy into the movement.”Mr. Markey, who has endorsed Ms. Warren for president, suggested Mr. Bloomberg had chosen wisely by directing his energy away from the primary.“I think that Mike realized that his time would be better spent doing rather than talking,” Mr. Markey said.An earlier version misstated Mr. Bloomberg’s age. He is 77, not 76.Shane Goldmacher contributed reporting.Advertisement