https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/07/opinion/columbia-nimesh-patel-comedian-kicked-offstage.html
Opinion | I Was Kicked Off Stage by College Students. Did I Deserve It? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
978
AdvertisementSupported byColumbia students didn’t like my joke and they had the right to cut my mic. But we all should have gotten the chance to stick it out. By Nimesh PatelMr. Patel is a comedian.I’ve experienced a lot of strange things while performing comedy: Rosario Dawson made fun of me while I was bombing in front of hundreds of Bernie Sanders fans. I once had to tell the crowd mid-show that the venue was closing for an impromptu health inspection. On Nov. 30, I performed stand-up as part of an annual event put on by the Asian-American Alliance at Columbia, and about 20 minutes into the show, my microphone was cut off.It wasn’t because of some fire code violation, or because some violently drunk heckler and I were about to fistfight. It was because three student organizers came onstage and politely told me they were going in a different direction with the next 30 minutes of my remaining time after deciding my material was offensive.This was the joke that prompted their decision, slightly paraphrased:I open by saying I live in Hell’s Kitchen, a diverse area in New York populated by, among others, gay black men who are not shy about telling me they don’t approve of what I’m wearing. I try to learn things from everyone I encounter, and one day I realize oh, this is how you know being gay can’t be a choice — no one would choose to be gay if they’re already black. No one is doubling down on hardship. Then I say, no black dude wakes up and thinks that being a black man in America is too easy. No black dude says, “I’m going to put on a Madonna halter top and some Jordans and make an Indian dude real uncomfortable.” That’s not a choice.The joke bombed — total silence in the crowd of several hundred students — but I didn’t think anything was abnormal. I wrote the joke about six years ago, and it may be hacky at this point, but I certainly don’t see it as anti-anyone. While comedians can and do tailor sets for audiences — you don’t do blue jokes in a room full of nuns kind of thing — for the most part you learn what works with a crowd only when it works or doesn’t. This particular joke has worked at New York clubs full of gay people, black people and college students multiple times. I didn’t think twice about using it in a room full of smart, progressive young adults.I carried on and went back to getting some laughs. Five minutes later, I was asked to leave.I walked offstage, silent and angry. I was in shock. On the car ride down to another show, every cliché about college kids today was churning through my mind: Are these college students really this soft? What has become of the coddled mind! Everyone’s so easily offended! Jerry Seinfeld was right when he said a few years ago that college kids “don’t know what the hell they’re talking about.”If I could afford not to perform at colleges again, I would have stopped thinking there.But I’ve kept thinking about it. The student organizers were within their rights to pull me offstage; people are just as within their rights to be offended by anything, as comedians are within their rights to say anything. I believe the student leaders were wrong to cut my mic, but as a person, I cannot control how people think and how they react.I do think how people process and react has been broken. People aren’t worse — the way we consume things is. It is much easier to be offended these days. On social media and with a 24-hour news cycle, we are bombarded with noise all the time, so much so it is hard to sift through and find the signal and find what is really being said. Getting the signal becomes a matter of creating shortcuts. That’s why trigger warnings exist. It’s when those shortcuts prevent you from listening and determining what is actually being said that they have failed you.Do I think that students missed out because I didn’t finish my set? Of course I do — it’s my material. Do I think maybe I would have gotten to stay if I hadn’t told that joke? I don’t know. The rest of my set was just me yelling, “Columbia rules, Dartmouth drools!”When you silence someone you don’t agree with or find offensive, not only do you implement the tactic used by the people you disdain; you also do yourself the disservice of missing out on a potentially meaningful conversation. You cannot affect change if you are not challenged.I don’t think college students and young people are “soft,” though. This is the generation that got a million people to march for gun control this year and somehow got my Indian-immigrant dad to recycle. You have no idea how tough you have to be to persuade a guy named Sanjay to separate plastic and glass.I have to be an optimist when it comes to considering this next generation because to be pessimistic is to think the world is ending and that we should all walk into the ever-rising plastic-filled ocean.After I was forced offstage, something unexpected happened: Notes of support flooded in. Students apologized via email and via Instagram DM. They told me: We’re not all sensitive people; we can take jokes; you shouldn’t have been pulled offstage, that was wrong. Three Columbia students even came to my next show to apologize in person.I was grateful. They helped me see that when older people call students today oversensitive, we do the same thing that we accuse the college students of doing — jumping to a predetermined conclusion based on the action of a small group. I’ve been talking about this onstage since the night it happened, and I’ve realized that this generalization about college students is not unlike racists thinking every brown person is a terrorist, or people thinking that every orange-faced, yellow-haired person is a lying idiot. Most brown people have yet to blow anything up, and most orange-faced yellow-haired people are decent Floridians.Unfortunately, the small group controls the bullhorn. I’ve done shows at colleges all over the country — Alaska, Ohio, Maryland and Texas in the past year or so. They’ve all been great and receptive of material that I consider more challenging than anything I did at Columbia.I do not think we should let the actions of a small group — actions that get blown out of proportion because they feed a narrative many people want to hear — paint college campuses as bad places to perform and paint this next generation as doomed. That’s a scary and incorrect way to look at the world. And I’m not Jerry Seinfeld. I can’t afford to do that.Nimesh Patel is a stand-up comedian.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement