https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/09/movies/winter-on-fire-the-view-from-the-trenches-of-a-political-uprising.html
‘Winter on Fire’: The View From the Trenches of a Political Uprising - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1594
AdvertisementSupported byBy A.O. ScottSome of the images in Evgeny Afineevsky’s “Winter on Fire: Ukraine’s Fight for Freedom” will be familiar from CNN and social media, and not only because the specific events — the protests in Kiev in early 2014 that drove Ukraine’s President Viktor F. Yanukovych from power — were widely broadcast at the time. They were also part of a pattern. The spectacle of thousands of people gathering in a city square and refusing to leave in spite of state violence, bad weather and internal dissension has become a common sight, in Cairo and Istanbul and in the earlier wave of “color revolutions” in what used to be the Soviet bloc.“Winter on Fire” captures the idealism and bravery of the Ukrainians who gathered in Maidan Square to protest Mr. Yanukovych’s turn away from the European Union and toward a closer relationship with Russia. The film starts with a short, punchy history lesson, and is sprinkled with animated maps that give a street-by-street, building-by-building overview of the clashes between the protesters and various government forces. But most of what you see and hear consists of ground-level, in-the-moment acts of witness. The cameras are at the side of the demonstrators and in the path of phalanxes of riot police. Modern technology may not yet be able to capture the smell of gunpowder and tear gas, but Mr. Afineevsky takes the viewer closer to the action than might have seemed possible.Rarely has a documentary achieved such immediacy. The clearest precedent is “The Square,” Jehane Noujaim’s 2013 record of the Egyptian upheavals that began in 2011. Ms. Noujaim’s film was attuned to the complexities of the three-way struggle for power involving the Muslim Brotherhood, the Egyptian Army and the secular democrats caught in the middle. “Winter on Fire” is a more viscerally partisan film, a work of passionate advocacy rather than political analysis. Its intention is partly to fortify Ukraine’s resistance to Russian domination, military and otherwise, and to tell a vivid tale of heroism and villainy.Mr. Afineevsky succeeds brilliantly, turning an after-the-fact reminder of events that have faded from the headlines into a grippingly suspenseful real-life action film. What “Winter on Fire” lacks in journalistic detachment it more than makes up for in fidelity to the feelings and motives of the participants. It’s more than just a portrait of terror, anger, desperation and resolve; it communicates those emotions directly, into the bloodstream and nervous system of the audience.There are limitations to this approach to documentary, just as there are limitations to the style of political activism it depicts. The mass uprisings of recent years have yielded ambiguous — and sometimes disastrous — results, and the transition from crowds and slogans to policies and procedures is mined with compromise and disappointment. Viewers seeking a nuanced, contextual understanding of recent events in Ukraine may not find that in “Winter on Fire.” But they will gain a powerful sense of what the Maidan revolution meant to its participants, and why they risked their lives to bring it about.Movie data powered by IMDb.comAdvertisement