https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/arts/television/game-of-thrones-review-arya-hound-season-6-episode-8-no-one.html
‘Game of Thrones’ Season 6, Episode 8: I’m Still Me - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1716
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jeremy EgnerSo it turns out everything with Arya was more or less what it appeared to be last week.At least that’s how it appeared in this week’s episode of “Game of Thrones.” (With those crazy faceless types, you can never be sure.) But after lots of speculation about whether the Waif attack we saw on the bridge was really what we saw, that seems to be, in fact, what we saw. Arya was actually wounded, and the Waif was really after her.Arya’s flight for her life was exciting but ultimately somewhat anticlimactic in an uneven eighth episode of “Game of Thrones.” The odd behavior we saw last week — Arya strolling about the city as if assassins weren’t after her — was, it turns out, just odd behavior, not a feint masking some clever twist to come. The intriguing Lady Crane, who seemed as if she could become more significant, was killed in perfunctory fashion by the Waif.[Ahead of the final season of “Game of Thrones,” relive it all with our ultimate watching guide, including episode recaps and deep plot dives.]In the end Arya lured her pursuer, as many initially expected, to the hidy-hole we glimpsed two weeks ago, when her extinguishing of the candle presaged her plan of attack. Namely, to use the very sightless fighting skills she learned through the Waif’s beatings to dispatch her former teacher, before mounting her head on the wall of the House of Black and White.Um, you passed!, Jaqen told her, either because that somehow had been his scheme all along, or because she had her sword at his chest. A girl is finally no one. Congratulations!Negative, Arya replied. I’m still me and I’m going home.I’m happy to hear it, but I am still left wondering a few things. Like how she was able to perform such physical feats so soon after such a savage, knife-twisting-in-the-guts attack? Or how did all the sweeping, body cleaning and blind-begging she did for the Faceless Men teach her parkour? I suspect the answer is some form of, “You know, magic” — we did see her drinking from the poison pool and these are, after all, people who change faces as effortlessly as you or I might change our socks. The conventional rules of physics clearly don’t apply to the House of Black and White or its residents, and I don’t want to obsess too much over details of verisimilitude.It’s just not all that satisfying. After endless stick-beatings and the events of last week, it all seemed a little too tidy.The larger issue is that the show burned a lot of calories over the past couple of seasons on Arya’s mostly uncaptivating assassin training, only to have her arrive where we expected her to: reaffirming her sense of self and off in search of greater adventures. Will she be more adept going forward, and did her apprenticeship in no one-ness provide the chrysalis phase crucial to all callow youths turned formidable warriors, be it Luke Skywalker or Daniel Larusso? Yes and yes. But it also felt as if the show had her spin her wheels until things were ripe in Winterfell for her return. A man is underwhelmed.The needle remains similarly unmoved, in the big picture, at Riverrun, where after some saber rattling, Jaime took over the castle and Blackfish, whom we never even knew we were supposed to care about until a few weeks ago (and thus didn’t, really), died in a presumably clumsy swordfight offscreen.Two armies may have been squaring off in what looked like a siege, as Pod helpfully pointed out, but the real action was in the tents. Brienne, who arrived full of honor and duty as well as some smoldering longing, was reunited with Jaime. She threatened to fight him if necessary. “Let’s hope it doesn’t come to that,” he said. It didn’t, because later, in the prisoner tent, he owned the whole twincest thing so convincingly that Edmure opted to betray his uncle rather than risk having his baby used as a catapult projectile. Then Jaime and Brienne shared a meaningful wave as she rowed away.One takeaway: Jaime’s tortured but finely delivered monologue about his devotion to Cersei, contrasted with the swollen emotion of both his exchange with Brienne and the wave destined to launch a thousand GIFs, left me even more persuaded that Cersei is not long for this story. Jaime’s devotion to her is the obstacle between him and the inner nobility that some part of him is desperate to embrace. So farewell for now, Kingslayer. You’ll be a better man soon.Speaking of Cersei, things escalated in King’s Landing and it didn’t work in her favor, as usual. On the one hand, she did have the satisfaction of seeing Mountainstein pop the head off a Sparrow as if it was a fleshy bottle cap. (Big week for trailer moments: We got both the “I choose violence” line and Arya’s flying leap.) But soon she learned that her foolproof plan to win her freedom through trial by combat was not actually High Septon-proof.That’s who I assume convinced Tommen to end the procedure, dooming Cersei and Loras to some sort of Old Testament tribunal. Adding insult to injury, Cersei is probably pretty sick of having her old “twin pillars” line thrown back in her face.In the east, terrible jokes gave way to bombardment, as invading slaver ships pummeled the pyramid of Meereen in a scene that, with its combination of gloomy hues, harsh geometry and bursts of fire, incongruously reminded me of “Blade Runner.” (Another tale about culture clashes and what it means to be human in an increasingly inhuman world — plus Tyrells!)“No more talking from you,” Grey Worm told Tyrion. “Your talking gave us this.” You’ll recall that Tyrion was feeling smug a few weeks ago about his negotiations with the slavers but here’s the thing, Tyrion: They’re slavers. They’re terrible, untrustworthy people. Grey Worm and Missandei knew it, but he waved them off.Lucky for him Daenerys Targaryen made her fortuitous return, as foreshadowed throughout the episode. Drogon flapped away in the distance, ideally on his way to incinerate the slaver ships. But knowing him, probably not — perhaps Theon and Yara will arrive and we’ll get what I think would be our first big naval battle. (The Battle of Blackwater was ships versus city.)Too bad Varys won’t be around to see it. At this point, “Game of Thrones” is just toying with us, repeatedly giving us mere scraps of the Tyrion-and-Varys show, one of the most sublime pairings on a series filled with great ones, only to tear it asunder. I guess the eunuch support group I proposed last week will have to make do with one less member.Thank the Lord of Light we had the Clegane Chronicles to carry us through the week. After awhile dabbling in humble service, the Hound was looking mighty Hound-like on Sunday, vengefully wielding his ax and rhetorically dismantling those he just axed. “You’re [not good] at dying, you know that?” he told one.It was one of several excellent lines — the guy spent the entire episode making up for lost time in the quip department. It turned out that the Brotherhood pillagers had defied their own group by decimating the Hound’s settlement. We learned that from the oft-killed Beric Dondarrion and Thoros of Myr, his resurrector, who both returned to the story for the first time since the Hound killed Beric, briefly, in Season 3. “We all bloody die except this one here,” the Hound said on Sunday. After some negotiating about who would get to kill the scoundrels, a deal was struck. “You’re getting old, Clegane,” someone said. “He’s not,” he replied, kicking a condemned man’s stump out from under him.Which is to say, Brother Ray’s preachings against violence don’t seem to have sunk in. Now the Brotherhood has its own plans for the redemption of Sandor Clegane, involving “cold winds rising in the North” that we’ve seen ourselves a time or two.“You can still help a lot more than you’ve harmed, Clegane,” Beric said.Whatever Beric. If you really want to help, just find the man a couple of chickens.• I know Arya’s killing of the Waif was on-brand, illustrating the dark-fighting skills she spent her blind-time refining. But between that and the offscreen death of Blackfish, it felt as if the producers were saving up their stunt outlay for next week’s Bastard Brawl 2016.• It wasn’t entirely clear what the surrender of Riverrun means for Sansa’s hopes for Tully support in the fight in the North. I don’t really expect the broken Edmure to rally the troops, but I suppose the possibility still technically exists.• The biggest tragedy of Brienne’s sad departure was that it robs us of further training sessions between Pod and Bronn. “Lesson No. 1,” Bronn told him. “Assume everyone wants to hit you.” Words to live by.• That said, I was slightly disturbed by this exchange: “I thought you’d be dead by now,” Bronn said. “Not yet,” Pod replied. “Game of Thrones,” I beg of you: Don’t kill off poor Pod. From Tyrion to Brienne to Kings Landing’s women of ill-repute, all the man has done is serve with humility and grace.• “This is Dany we’re talking about — so far she’s more prone to spinning wheels than breaking them. It could take her another season and a half just to get back to Meereen.” I wrote that a couple of weeks ago. Maybe that fire really did transform her.• So what did you think? Were you as underwhelmed as I was by much of this episode? Any guesses what that rumor Cersei and Qyburn discussed might refer to? What’s your favorite translator joke? Please weigh in in the comments.An earlier version of this article misidentified the character who said “You can still help a lot more than you’ve harmed, Clegane.” He is Beric, not Thoros.Advertisement