https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/29/magazine/adam-mckay-dick-cheney-vice.html
Why the Director of ‘Anchorman’ Decided to Take On Dick Cheney - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
104
FeatureWith “Vice,” his biopic of Bush’s vice president, Adam McKay completes his journey from “S.N.L.” writer to fierce critic of the American right.Adam McKay at his home in Los Angeles in November.CreditCreditMax Farago for The New York TimesSupported byBy Jonah WeinerAdam McKay strode through his backyard one recent afternoon to show me the exact spot where, last January, a heart attack nearly killed him. An enormous pizza floatie drifted along the edge of his swimming pool, yellow cheese aglow in the Los Angeles sun, as McKay pointed to some exercise equipment. “We’re out here, working out,” he recalled, “and all of a sudden my hands start getting tingly and I’m feeling really queasy.”McKay made his name as a filmmaker in the early 2000s with a string of hit comedies that included “Anchorman” and “Talladega Nights.” But since co-writing and directing a 2015 adaptation of Michael Lewis’s financial-crash caper “The Big Short,” which earned him an Oscar for screenwriting, he has gravitated to more serious material. His new movie, “Vice,” is a grim account of the life of Dick Cheney, with Christian Bale — smoldering beneath prosthetic jowls and the ample weight he gained for the role — in the lead. McKay went into it aware that it would be, as he put it to me, “the most challenging, ambitious movie” he ever made.“The movie was big,” he said. His shooting script encompassed five decades of Cheney’s life, 200 locations and more than 150 speaking parts. Chief among McKay’s coping mechanisms for stress, going back to his 20s, were cigarettes and junk food, and during the “Vice” shoot, he averaged half a pack of American Spirit Ultra Lights a day and put on around 25 pounds. When filming was through, McKay, who is 50, booked time with a trainer he’d hired before. He came over for a session in mid-January. It was then that McKay’s stomach turned. “My trainer says, ‘Are you O.K.?’ And I’m, like: ‘Yeah, yeah, I’m just in bad shape. I’m worn out. I’m still smoking.’ ”The trainer decided not to push it and left. Just then, McKay remembered that Bale, when researching Cheney’s several heart attacks in preparation for “Vice,” “met with a heart surgeon, and he said: ‘There’s a lot of ways you can show a heart attack. The hands tingling is one, the most common one is the pain in the arm, but what’s really common is queasiness.’ And in that moment, I ran upstairs.” McKay swallowed three baby aspirin and called his wife, who called 911. At the hospital, a doctor confirmed the bad news: He’d had a heart attack. The good news was that they were opening him up, inserting a stent and, if McKay quit smoking and got into better shape, he’d come out fine. One of his two daughters brought him a card at the hospital that read, “Congratulations on Your New Baby!” which she’d modified to say, “I’m Sorry about Your New Heart Attack!” “So I’m 100 percent O.K.,” McKay said. “I do get a little lightheaded sometimes, but I recovered. It’s like in ‘Jaws,’ when the shark swims right past the kid and doesn’t touch him.” He grinned. “And then about two days later, I called Bale and I said, ‘Hey man, either you or Dick Cheney saved my life.’ ”This is as close as McKay is likely to come to expressing good will toward the 46th vice president. Far from a grateful tribute, “Vice” — which co-stars Amy Adams as Cheney’s wife, Lynne — proceeds in a spirit of frenetic and ferocious irreverence. Annapurna, the company behind the film, spent about $60 million to make it, and executives there are positioning the movie, as they did last year with “Phantom Thread,” as a major awards-season contender. But McKay had little interest in obeying the familiar rhythms of the academy-pleasing biopic that Cheney’s story might have inspired. In previous features, McKay staged the murder of a man by an airborne trident; filmed a prosthetic scrotum in close-up bobbing atop a snare drum; and enlisted Margot Robbie to explain subprime mortgages from a bubble bath. And yet “Vice” is, in tone and form, one of the wildest movies he has made — and one of the wildest movies ever made about politics, period.A filmmaker less restive than McKay, having cast actors as gifted as Bale and Adams, might have done his best impersonation of, say, Steven Spielberg directing “Lincoln” — filling his movie with so much solemn soliloquizing and rousing Oval Office debate. But in “Vice,” scenes of finely wrought drama give way to passages of surreally heightened satire, which in turn give way to horrible vérité footage of “enhanced interrogations.” The movie doesn’t only double and triple back on itself but is punctuated throughout with nature-documentary clips, the “Whassup!” beer commercial and a variety of self-reflexive feints. The film’s narrator is Jesse Plemons, whose relationship to Cheney is mysterious: at points he is a soldier, at others a warehouse worker, and at others, Naomi Watts, playing a cable-news anchor, is suddenly narrating instead.What is unambiguous, by the end, is McKay’s conviction that the American right, in its post-Reagan consolidation of power, has set our country and our planet on a path to ruin — and that no single figure illustrates this better than Cheney. “He was the expert safecracker who opened up the safe,” McKay said, alluding to Cheney’s deft dismantling of checks on executive power, “and now the orangutan is in there, throwing around the money and the jewels.” McKay knows that a conservative backlash to his film is very likely, and while he emphasized how diligently he grounded the film in research, he also argued that making a less confrontational movie, hewing to a measured realism would have felt not only boring but also incommensurate to the task.“I’ve never dealt with a tone like this, and I don’t think it’s by accident,” McKay said. “We’re living in a world with a tone that none of us has ever experienced. Pipe bombs are being sent to the leaders of a political party, and the guy who made ‘Dilbert’ is saying, You know the bombs were really made by left-wingers because they didn’t work.” He made an incredulous face. “So, you’re claiming the assassination attempts are a false flag operation while slamming the liberals and you’re the guy who did ‘Dilbert’?” When it came to the movie’s protean tone, he said, “All I can tell you is that we were very conscious of it, we knew it was challenging and indefinable — and we knew it had to be.”This was true, he added, not in spite of the material’s seriousness, but because of it. “I’m suspicious of anything that feels like an old form,” he said. “We’re discovering new styles and forms, because this era we’re in demands it. The world has gotten so cartoonishly exaggerated and over the top. Why be subtle anymore?”In certain ways, McKay is vulnerable to caricature as a “Hollywood liberal.” He lives with his wife of 19 years, the film and theater director Shira Piven, and their daughters in an old, mansion-studded part of town. They own a five-bedroom, cedar-shingled home outfitted with solar panels and shielded from the street by hedges some 12 feet tall. He drives a Tesla, which was charging out front.But like many self-identifying progressives, McKay — who grew up on food stamps and was raised in suburban Pennsylvania by his waitress single mother (his father, a musician, left the family when McKay was 7) — has grown steadily disenchanted with what he calls “the corporate left.” This summer he joined the L.A. chapter of the Democratic Socialists of America. He thinks that capitalism must come under greater, Scandinavian-style regulatory control, “especially if we’re going to do anything about climate change.” Earlier this year he left Funny or Die, a comedy website he co-founded in 2007, after it entered into a sponsored-content agreement with Shell, a deal he called “disgusting.”McKay stands at a towering 6-foot-5 and sometimes seems to have more body than he knows what to do with. In his home office, he arranged himself across a beige couch like a coat hurled off in a hurry: torso horizontal, head kinked up against a pillow, legs crossed off the front. The room was trimmed in dark wood. “This is where I wrote ‘Vice,’ ” McKay said, indicating a desk facing a bay window. A faux-Roman bust, purchased in a prop-department sale for $5, dwarfed McKay’s computer. A vintage poster for the Japanese release of “Network” hung beside bookshelves decorated with memorabilia from McKay’s films: the clapboard from “The Big Short,” a production still from “The Other Guys.”Piled together on one shelf were some of the books McKay consulted for “Vice,” including Barton Gellman’s Cheney biography, “Angler,” Jane Mayer’s “war on terror” history, “The Dark Side,” and Cheney’s own memoir, “In My Time.” “There are a lot of layers to my attraction to Cheney’s story, and one of them is how quiet and mysterious he was, how he’s covered his trail all these years,” McKay said. “You read his entire autobiography, and you learn nothing about him. Cheney is one of the most brilliant bureaucratic infighters in history, but he knew how to do all this stuff so that you barely knew it was happening.”McKay has dedicated his recent work to illuminating just such self-obscuring systems of power, the kind that depend on opacity to function. In “The Big Short,” the narrator, played by Ryan Gosling, puts it this way: “Mortgage-backed securities. Subprime loans. Tranches. It’s pretty confusing, right? Does it make you feel bored? Or stupid? Well, it’s supposed to. Wall Street loves to use confusing terms to make you think only they can do what they do. Or, even better, for you just to leave them the [expletive] alone.” Last year, McKay directed the pilot for and served as an executive producer on “Succession,” an HBO drama about a Murdoch-style media-empire patriarch and his reprobate heirs — their nefarious business dealings and abject power moves.In “Vice,” he uses Cheney’s life to tell a broader tale about what McKay describes as “the Republican revolution and how it changed our country.” He sees Cheney as a “Zelig-style” figure of the right. His career in national politics began in the Nixon administration as a congressional intern and then apprentice to Donald Rumsfeld and, from there, intersected and coincided with the rise of key conservative figures: among them the Fox News founder, Roger Ailes, who first floated the idea for a conservative news network while working for Nixon; right-wing megadonors like the Koch brothers; conservative strategy shops like the Heritage Foundation; and, finally, George W. Bush, over whose administration — and over whose decision to invade Iraq after Sept. 11, despite paltry intelligence linking the two — Cheney exercised unprecedented influence for a vice president.One of McKay’s models was “The Power Broker,” Robert Caro’s landmark biography of Robert Moses. “He’s in the middle of all this stuff,” McKay said of Cheney, “and finally he gets his hand on the wheel.” Unlike Caro, McKay had to tell his story through a camera, and so there are compressions, elisions and metaphors in “Vice” that reflect both a filmmaker’s desire to enthrall the crowd and a prosecutor’s desire to nail the defendant. Reading journalistic accounts of Cheney’s move, in 2000, from the private sector back into public service, we learn that he took elaborate steps to divest from Halliburton, the oil conglomerate where he was C.E.O., to avoid the appearance of conflict; here, the relationship between Cheney and the energy sector is presented as one of clear cronyism. Or take Sept. 11. In Barton Gellman’s play-by-play of that morning in “Angler,” it’s strongly implied that Cheney usurped Bush’s authority, ignoring the chain of command and giving fighter jets the O.K. to shoot down commercial airliners if they appeared to be hijacked. The official White House version was that Bush gave Cheney permission to pass along this order, and Gellman, poring carefully through communications records and notes taken by administration staff members, leaves open the extremely slim possibility that this is true. In “Vice” there is no such equivocation. We see Cheney give the order to take out the planes himself. Compression, of course, isn’t the same as distortion: Jane Mayer, the investigative journalist, described this scene to me as “a perfect gem,” and told McKay, after he screened the movie for her, that he “got it right.”One way McKay might have buttressed “Vice” against possible charges of liberal bias would be to include the sorts of political critiques he readily offers up in conversation. “When Clinton was elected, he cut welfare and deregulated banks, just like a Republican would have done,” he said, from his couch. “Obama waged a war against whistle-blowers, he let the banks off the hook and he expanded executive power.” McKay did tinker for a while with stitching points like these into “Vice” — making it “the story of Dick Cheney and the rise of the Republican Party, and how they got so big they swallowed the Democrats.” To this end, he pieced in footage of Hillary Clinton supporting the Iraq war. “But it’s hard,” McKay went on. “The audience only has a certain amount of oxygen in their lungs.” As he said earlier: “I could have made the movie three and a half hours long, but you can thank me that I didn’t.” (The film runs just over 130 minutes.)McKay predicted that some of the fiercest criticisms of “Vice” might come from putatively sympathetic voices: “I actually think left-wing friends of mine are going to be mad at me for humanizing him as much as I do.” Throughout the film, Cheney is depicted as a fearsomely capable stalker of prey; a recurring motif concerns his passion for fly fishing, which McKay described to me as crucial to understanding him. He hired a fly fisherman as a consultant. “You can’t believe the level of patience and detail that’s involved — lifting up the rocks to see what kinds of bugs are underneath so you know what kind of lure to use; watching the drift, the way the sun’s hitting it so you know what illusion to create with your lure. And that’s the story with Dick Cheney. Meticulous detail and tremendous patience.” Cheney is rendered tenderly in his interactions with Lynne, his sweetheart since high school, and with his second daughter, Mary, whose coming out as gay in the mid-’80s he met with private encouragement and affection. Christian Bale told me that he seized on Cheney’s marriage as his way into the role. “With any part, you choose what you focus on,” he said, explaining that, in “Vice,” he chose “the love story. I think Cheney’s one of the most romantic men around. At the start he wasn’t particularly ambitious. Very laid back. But he has this undying love, where he’ll do anything to win Lynne’s approval — he did it all for her.” He added that “the hardest thing with playing him was trying to understand that awesome power. I could never quite imagine what it must be like to wake up every morning knowing the power within your hands, where your choices affect whether people will die. I obsessed over it for months. But I don’t think he sees himself as a villain — unless someone’s a sociopath, I think they believe their motives are for a bigger good.”On the subject of villainy, McKay said: “Cheney and Bush did kill, conservatively, half a million civilians in Iraq. Some estimates have it at more than a million. So he’s pretty bad.” But, he said, “I think you have to humanize him, because unless we see how a regular human being can go down these roads, it’s useless.” (McKay has heard nothing from the Cheneys, who did not participate in the making of the film, although he noted that Mary started following him on Twitter.)Recently, a sizable portion of the left has adopted surprising, relatively sanguine attitudes toward the Bush-Cheney years. I asked McKay, who directed a scathingly satirical 2009 Broadway show about Bush called, “You’re Welcome America,” whether he saw his unsparing portrait of Cheney in “Vice” — humanizing gestures notwithstanding — as a would-be corrective to liberal amnesia on this score. “I hope to God that it is,” McKay said, nodding. “Really what that shows you is the number of people for whom government is just about appearance. Bush and Cheney just kept up the facade, whereas this administration doesn’t even remotely pretend. So when I hear people say, ‘I miss the days of Bush and Cheney,’ what they’re really saying is, ‘I miss the days when people would at least pretend.’ ” He went on: “Every time I see it, I shake my head, like, ‘You’ve got to be kidding me. The world economy collapsed, we had the greatest military fiasco in U.S. history apart from Vietnam.’ When I hear ‘Trump makes you miss Bush,’ I go, ‘There’s no question that Bush and Cheney are way ahead of him in terms of damage done.’ ” He characterized such Bush nostalgia bluntly: “Now that my house is on fire, I long for when it was infested by bees.”In July, McKay was sprawled in a similarly oblong configuration across a different couch, this one in a postproduction suite on the Sony Pictures lot. He was working with the editor Hank Corwin to fine-tune “Vice” for release. Corwin, a Hollywood veteran who cut “The Big Short” and whose other credits include Terrence Malick’s “Tree of Life” and Oliver Stone’s “Natural Born Killers,” stood at a monitor in beat-up running sneakers. An executive producer, Robyn Wholey, sat on a stool.“We’ve been playing with this one scene,” McKay explained. “It’s one of our most challenging runs.” The scene in question takes place in Dick and Lynne Cheney’s bedroom on a stormy night in 2000, after George W. Bush has won the Republican nomination and offered Cheney the No. 2 spot on the ticket. Cheney has declined, volunteering instead to lead the vice-presidential search. In the available accounts of this moment, Cheney’s motivations remain obscure. Was the search a canard — a mechanism for Cheney, who always intended to take the job, to amass dirt on G.O.P. luminaries that he could later leverage against them? By stalling, was he able to extract more power from Bush when he eventually said yes?Rather than paper over this uncertainty, McKay decided to dramatize it in a particularly audacious way: Bale and Adams begin speaking in a Shakespearean approximation of Early Modern English. “Is my life to be spent in servant’s bow to Nixon, Ford, the thespian Reagan and Bush the Elder?” Dick asks, to which Lynne replies, “Danced nimbly ’round the kings’ hearth thou hath, even whilst clamored I for more.” As thunder grows louder in the background, the couple converse in iambs for three full minutes, working themselves up into a libidinal fever as they contemplate the opportunity before them: “Mine own blood and will are yours ’til pierced be the last soldier’s breastplate spilling forth its ruby jellied treasures!” Adams cries out as she climbs atop Bale.Corwin showed me the Shakespeare run, then said, “Every time we play this at test screenings —”“It’s resoundingly rejected,” McKay said.“It’s horrifying how much people hate it,” Corwin reiterated.Wholey chimed in on a more upbeat note: “I missed it when you took it out.”“Some people love it,” McKay allowed, “but three out of four definitely hate it.”McKay has long relied on test screenings to shape his movies. Making comedies, he liked to swap in different punch lines for different crowds, like a stand-up, seeing which ones got bigger laughs and tweaking cuts accordingly. Even after moving into drama, he has found test screenings and focus groups indispensable to ensuring that audiences remain on board, moment to moment — especially so with “Vice,” given its collage of moods and modes. “If you sit in rooms like this too long, you lose perspective,” Corwin said. Not that the goal is milquetoast consensus. In 2013, when I visited the set of “Anchorman 2,” McKay put it to me this way: “Ideally, you want to be alienating four people, and you want six people to love it.” (Annapurna is likely hoping for more favorable math — in October, reports circulated that the company was suffering from money trouble, attributed to its model of spending lavishly on auteur-driven projects; McKay’s movies have all done well at the box office, but several of these reports invoked “Vice” as a particularly pricey gamble. Annapurna dismisses such reports and says they have full confidence in “Vice.”)McKay also showed “Vice” to filmmaker friends like Paul Thomas Anderson and David O. Russell. After Anderson, who watched two preliminary cuts, told McKay that the end of the movie worked great but the start “had problems,” McKay decided to scrap two early sections: an elaborate musical number and a prolonged passage set in Cheney’s Wyoming adolescence. McKay adored both but decided that Anderson was right — they were gumming up the machinery.Amy Adams, for her part, loved the Shakespeare sequence. “It’s such a great way to explain the motivations of the characters,” she said, while acknowledging that “it was challenging, because it could so easily feel big and broad, but it has to feel intimate.” The passage testified, in her mind, to the way McKay “was able to so seamlessly navigate tone.” She mentioned an informal exercise that she and McKay practiced on set to help keep her grounded in her character despite the movie’s many shifts in register. “I’d come in at the beginning of the day, kind of half-Lynne, half-Amy, and Adam and I would have these debates” — about news events depicted in the film, about whatever was in the headlines on that day of shooting. “It was such a great tool for me to get into Lynne,” she said.McKay wasn’t sure he could get the Shakespeare scene to click, but he was intent on trying. “We have a nice head of steam going through this part of the movie that we’re loath to mess up, so we took it out for a while,” he said. “The scene ends well — it’s always ended well. Getting into it is a little rickety. Now we’re feeling that the movie’s overall structure is playing so strong, though, that maybe we can try and pull off this cliff dive.” So they experimented. Three minutes did feel long. Could they trim the exchange closer to one? And what if Plemons’s narrator came in up top with some coy prefatory remarks to the effect of, “O.K., so we have no idea what was going through Cheney’s head here, and it’s not like we can just imagine it through a scene of fake Shakespeare — or can we?”McKay was leaning toward something like that: “My new thought is maybe we just go bigger with our interruption.” What if the screen went black?“No matter what we do, there’s gonna be a ‘What the [expletive]’ reaction,” said Corwin.“Oh, that’s a given,” McKay replied. “It’s more about percentages of ‘What the. ... ’ I could live with 46 percent. I could even get to 55-60 percent. But this scene might be 88 percent, where you start ripping a hole in the movie. Are you O.K. with 88 percent ‘What the ... ,’ Hank?”“I’ll follow you to the gates of hell,” Corwin said, and rewound the scene to give it another look.McKay has long regarded the fourth wall as a barrier not to be playfully punctured so much as rammed into at full speed. In 1992, when he was a young improv comic living in Chicago, he led a crowd out of a theater and up to a rooftop where, with the aid of a CPR dummy, he leapt to his “death” in front of them. In another performance, he surrounded the audience with a phalanx of paratroopers — armed, screaming and, as if that weren’t unsettling enough, wearing gas masks. In 1995, Lorne Michaels caught wind of McKay and hired him onto the writing staff of “Saturday Night Live.” After just one year, at age 28, he was promoted to head writer. McKay told me that his favorite sketches were those oddities that cast and crew referred to as “10-to-ones,” for the time they aired — the later the hour, the weirder the sketch could be.He found a like-minded conspirator in Will Ferrell, who was hired onto “S.N.L.” the same day as McKay, and who shared his taste for absurd sketches poking fun at oafish, arrogant, rageful men. In the first thing they wrote together, Ferrell played a grotesque version of Neil Diamond, revealing the depraved inspirations behind benign hits like “Forever in Blue Jeans.” (“This next song I wrote after I killed a drifter to get an erection.”) One of McKay’s fondest early contributions to the show starts with the title sequence for a program called “The Hulk Hogan Talk Show!!!” This sequence — consisting of a droningly repetitive jingle, garish title cards and numerous stills of Hogan in the ring — lasts an almost interminable 45 seconds, ramping up in fanfare as it goes. The joke is that this is all misdirection. When the talk show finally starts, we are greeted by Ferrell, wearing a suit and tie on a chintzy set and interviewing a recently released hostage. “Hulk Hogan is on vacation,” Ferrell says. “I’m your guest host, Phil Tobin.” (McKay mocked Cheney several times on the show, including in cold opens and an installment of the animated “X-Presidents” series, which he co-wrote, during which the ghost of George Washington calls Cheney “a douche bag” and impales him with a quill pen.)McKay traces his sense of humor to a youthful love of Monty Python and some lasting lessons in irreverence from his mother. “She’d always be poking holes in things,” McKay said, whether it was sneaking him into the local Y.M.C.A. pool, because memberships were too expensive, or reading children’s books and changing them “so that Little Andy and Dottie were going to the supermarket and shoplifting.” He recalled how one April Fools’ Day, when he was in second grade, he got into bed and she’d dumped sand into it. “And she’s like, ‘April Fools’! It confused me for a couple days, but then it was awesome. It opened up the whole world to me, like, You can play pranks on people!” Over the past decade or so, McKay noted, his mother has grown increasingly conservative, faithfully watching Fox News and voting for Trump in the 2016 election despite supporting Obama in 2008. McKay described her move rightward as a source of both pain and confusion for him — and a source of ongoing debate between them — but said that their relationship remained a loving one.When he went to college at Temple University in Philadelphia, McKay studied literature. His favorite authors were those who scrambled storytelling conventions, like John Dos Passos and William Faulkner. Outside class, he tried stand-up comedy. “I started doing open mics and bombing,” he recalled. “I was never great, but I got decent enough.” McKay has said, “Occasionally I’d drop a political joke in, and I was really bad at it, so I would quickly get them out of my act and go back to joking about airplanes and girlfriends I broke up with.”During his senior year, a fellow aspiring comedian named Rick Roman came back from a trip to Chicago and told him, “ ‘There’s this thing out there called long-form improv, where you get onstage and do whatever you want,’ ” McKay recalled. “I go, ‘Like stand-up?’ ‘No. You go into a scene and you say, “We’re on the moon,” and the only rule is you can’t say no.’ ” McKay was sold. In 1990, just 18 credits shy of graduation, he unloaded his comic-book collection for $800, bought a secondhand Chrysler and moved to Chicago.There, he enrolled in improv classes with the avant-garde acting coach Del Close, a gruff, bearded guru whose past students had included Bill Murray and Gilda Radner, and whose ’90s-era charges included Tina Fey and Stephen Colbert. (Close died in 1999.) McKay joined an improv team called the Family, which became Close’s test group: “He would work out his new forms through us,” McKay recalled. In one of these, “we’d improvise a whole movie, and use movie language — credits, camera angles, smash cuts and all.” McKay, the erstwhile lit major, named one new form “the Deconstruction”: “You started with a scene played really well. Close listening, detailed characters, implying a world. And then for the rest of the form you rip that first scene apart: pick up on pieces of it, flash backward, flash forward, pick up a character element and exaggerate it.”In the early 1990s, McKay formed a troupe that would become the Upright Citizens Brigade, including Matt Besser, Horatio Sanz and Ian Roberts. Today, U.C.B. has grown into a bicoastal talent factory, offering classes in New York and Los Angeles, and its former students are everywhere in modern comedy. In its earliest incarnation, though, it was a scrappy upstart with an anarchic sensibility that stood in contrast to more established and relatively staid Chicago outfits like Second City. “We were doing this crazy show in a coffee house, but then we got a good review, and there were lines around the block,” McKay said. “It was an amazing experience, but I was still broke.” He eventually decamped for Second City, where he was integral to some modernizing changes — no more stage, no more curtain, no more rigidly formulaic revues — and where he “actually started making some money. Besser was pissed at me, but I’m like, ‘Dude, I can’t pay my rent!’ ” (His U.C.B. teammates soon replaced him with another young comedian, Amy Poehler.)It’s hard to imagine McKay making a movie like “Vice” without his time spent exploding narrative strategies and provoking audiences in Chicago. This is nowhere clearer than in accounts of “Piñata Full of Bees,” a hit Second City revue he cocreated. In one bit, McKay portrayed Noam Chomsky as a substitute teacher, terrifying grade-school children with the genocidal story of “the real Thanksgiving.” Cast members would interrupt performances to recite statistics about how, say, military spending dwarfed welfare spending.One night, they tried to convince the audience that President Clinton had just moments before been killed, stopping the performance with a shellshocked announcement. Wheeling out a television to watch news of the assassination, however, the cast became distracted by frivolous programming. The comedian Scott Adsit, who was part of the troupe, described this stunt several years ago: “We all started sitting with our backs to the audience, watching sports bloopers, and didn’t do anything but laugh at the TV for another 10 minutes, until the room cleared.” It was a macabre and confrontational prank they pulled only once, Adsit said, noting that even some Second City members were uncomfortable with it. He gave credit — or blame — where it was due: “It was Adam McKay’s idea.”In October, McKay flew to New York to show “Vice” to media types including Jane Mayer; the writer Ron Suskind; Ira Glass, host of “This American Life”; and Chris Hayes, the MSNBC personality. Annapurna also “hired a couple of fact checkers and let them beat us up,” McKay said, “and we caught a couple little mistakes and fixed them.” At a restaurant after one of these screenings, McKay picked a friendly fight with Glass and Hayes, asking why they didn’t lead every episode of their shows with climate-change stories. They replied that, if they did, pretty soon no one would tune in. “O.K., so on the face of it, nothing is more boring than climate science,” McKay told me. “But Hayes is brilliant, and we know Glass is, so I give them a hard time. I tell Hayes, ‘Dude, use big red letters that say BREAKING EMERGENCY: MILLIONS TO DIE — use the b.s. of television to do it!’ ”McKay, like Hayes and Glass, has become invested in figuring out how to get audiences to enjoy the taste of vegetables. He is producing a documentary series at Amazon called “This Giant Beast That Is the Global Economy,” which will explore such topics as the corruption-riddled world of concrete. He has signed on to direct a movie starring Jennifer Lawrence as Elizabeth Holmes, the Silicon Valley executive, indicted on charges of fraud, behind the disgraced health-services company Theranos. And, he told me, he has three ideas for movies about climate change, which he considers the ultimate vegetable: “I have one that’s epic, one that’s comedic and one that’s a poetic art film,” he said. The comedy — the only one of these he would describe — concerns a group of Republican congresspeople from Oklahoma, forced to live in an air-conditioned dome after their state has been otherwise depopulated by global warming, unwilling to give up their seats despite their nonexistent constituency.If McKay ever makes this movie, it will be bleak, no matter how funny it turns out. He acknowledged that “The Big Short” is a bleak movie, too, and that “Vice” is bleaker still: “It does not send you back into the world feeling good.” It was getting late in the afternoon. I could hear an animal whimpering in McKay’s kitchen. It was the family’s new puppy, a black-and-brown rescue named Timothy, who was being house-trained within a mesh-walled pen.McKay told me that not long after his heart attack, the last family pet, a beloved dog named Pumpkin, died. “That was tough,” he said, and there was more where that came from. Last fall, Shira Piven was riding in a Lyft when another driver smashed into the car. An ambulance rushed her to the hospital, where they took CT scans and M.R.I.s. Scrutinizing these, doctors discovered two troubling things: Piven’s neck was broken and, what’s more, there was a small growth in her chest, eventually diagnosed as malignant. “Lung cancer,” McKay said. “They removed a quarter of her lung, and for a month you could barely hear her talk.” Like McKay, Piven recovered, he said, but they were shaken. “And then on top of all this, you’re seeing democracy worldwide collapse, and we’re getting scientific reports from the U.N. basically saying mankind will be extinct in 25 years. I have just never experienced a two-year period like the last two years.”McKay’s comedies always carried dark undertones. Ferrell’s protagonists might have registered as endearing buffoons, but their tendencies toward ignorance, selfishness, sexism, racism and/or jingoism were among the ways that McKay signaled mordant satirical intentions. It might be most accurate to say that, rather than abandoning comedy in his films, he has inverted the ratio between light and dark.But despite McKay’s suspicion of “old forms” — despite his conviction that, circa 2018, the best use for a big megaphone is to deliver urgent and edifying messages as loudly as possible — spending all your time exploring the dark side can be wearying, especially if you spent much of your career chasing sillier and sillier ways to make strangers laugh. Making comedies, McKay was essentially a shadow cast member, yelling out impromptu jokes, midscene, for his actors to repeat, cracking them up as the cameras rolled. Far from disavowing his early movies, he recalled them proudly, describing the family-prayer scene in “Talladega Nights” — an improv-heavy sequence full of preposterous tangents about infant Jesus and Lynyrd Skynyrd — as “the best scene we’ve ever done.”Of his directorial approach, he told me that “doing a scene with Ferrell, it’s almost like I’m out there with him,” whereas, working with Bale and Adams on “Vice,” “it’s very gentle, very subtle. If Ferrell’s a Ferrari, meaning fast and fun, I feel like Bale and Adams are narwhals” — a wondrous species of whale with a unicorn-like tusk, hard to find outside the Far North. “You’re watching them, like: ‘I can’t believe I’m seeing this. I’m gonna shut up. That’s an actual narwhal. You can see the horn!’ ” He laughed. “Once I have this magical moment, then I’ll dare to wreck it.”I reminded McKay of a moment of a much daffier sort that I observed years ago, during the making of “Anchorman 2.” McKay and Ferrell improvised an improbable erotic fantasy about Mrs. Butterworth, nowhere in the film’s script, with each topping the other’s jokes, relay-race style, and sent the entire set into bouts of convulsive laughter. McKay beamed at this memory. “Oh, I miss those days,” he said, sounding suddenly homesick. Timothy was crying softly in the kitchen; the sun was setting; the sea ice was melting; the actual narwhals were imperiled. McKay shook his head. “You’re making me want to go do a comedy right now.”Jonah Weiner is a contributing writer for The Times Magazine and a contributing editor at Rolling Stone.Advertisement