https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/09/arts/television/carmichael-show-review.html
‘The Carmichael Show’ Takes on Tough Topics - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1662
AdvertisementSupported byCritic's NotebookBy James PoniewozikNBC’s “The Carmichael Show” has a simple message: America, we need to talk.Returning after a six-episode tryout late last summer, this family sitcom starring the standup comic Jerrod Carmichael has a lot to say — about topics from guns to race to the downfall of Bill Cosby. There are more inventive sitcoms, more visually artful ones. But few are as devoted to the bracing power of strong voices in a room, talking.Running Sunday nights on NBC (with a preview on Wednesday), “The Carmichael Show” is built on the barest of premises. Jerrod (Mr. Carmichael), a young man in Charlotte, N.C., finds himself caught between his liberal girlfriend, Maxine (Amber Stevens West), and his old-fashioned parents, the blue-collar Joe and the deeply religious Cynthia (David Alan Grier and Loretta Devine). An issue will arise — it will be pretty clear what, as the episode titles are along the lines of “Prayer” and “Gender” — and we’re off.Yet “The Carmichael Show” consistently feels surprising, not formulaic, partly because of the talent assembled, partly because of Mr. Carmichael’s comic philosophy of prodding his audience. (The episode in which Jerrod and Maxine argued over firearms, for instance, spoofed gun ownership and captured its allure at the same time: “It’s like listening to Beyoncé’s album,” Jerrod said of packing heat. “You just feel stronger and prettier for some reason.”)“The Carmichael Show” is part of a mini-revival of issues-oriented sitcoms, in the spirit of the 1970s comedies of Norman Lear, who produced “All in the Family” and “Good Times” (and is rebooting “One Day at a Time” for Netflix with Latino characters). CBS’s “Mom” tells stories about addiction and recovery, Fox’s “Bordertown” is rooted in the immigration war and Louis C.K.’s self-distributed “Horace and Pete” has dabbled in commentary on the 2016 election.Thematically, “The Carmichael Show” has most in common with “black-ish” — also about an African-American family, albeit a more affluent one — which in its second season has redoubled its social commentary. “Black-ish” has recently done episodes on handguns and the Black Lives Matter protests, subjects “The Carmichael Show” tackled last summer.Where “black-ish” has a more contemporary look, shooting single-camera and using more locations, “The Carmichael Show” is unapologetically old-school, shot multiple-camera on sets. (Joe and Cynthia’s living room even recalls Edith and Archie Bunker’s.)The staging determines the show’s style. It’s more playlike and hermetic; big events largely happen offstage, and the characters recount and debate them in the home and apartment sets. The “action” is almost all verbal.This is a more theatrical style of sitcom, and the show benefits from the brassy stage duet of Mr. Grier and Ms. Devine. Mr. Carmichael, in the grand tradition of stand-ups-turned-actors, can deliver a bone-dry punch line, but needs a seasoned cast around him.The new season kicks off with “Everybody Cheats,” a moral-dilemma story — Cynthia sees a friend’s husband with another woman — that unfolds into an argument about ethics, double standards and power. Cynthia worries about hurting her friend, Maxine argues that a good friend has to tell, and Jerrod cynically argues that successful men cheat, and the world accepts it: “Hillary Clinton’s running for president, and we think she’s weak because she should have left,” he says. “But if Bill Clinton walked through that door, we’d all go, ‘Oh my God, it’s Bill Clinton!’”The second new episode, “Fallen Heroes,” is about Bill Cosby, and it is on fire. Jerrod surprises Maxine with tickets to Mr. Cosby’s stand-up show, which she rejects because of the dozens of accusations of sexual assault against him. “The ironic part,” Maxine says, “is you would have to knock me unconscious to get me to go see Bill Cosby.”The episode doesn’t much debate whether Mr. Cosby is guilty. Instead, it turns on the audience: Can you separate love of the art from knowledge of the man?Airing on Mr. Cosby’s old network, this episode feels like a leader’s statue being pulled down in a public square. Even when the family laughs warmly at a rerun of “The Cosby Show,” Mr. Carmichael caustically deflates the moment: “Damn shame what he did to those women, though.”That gaspworthy kicker is the essence of “The Carmichael Show,” which is less interested in persuading its audience than denying them easy refuge. This sitcom is trying to say a lot right off the bat, and it sometimes knocks up against the cardboard edges of its characters. But it’s on its way to becoming one of TV’s finer discomfort zones.Advertisement