https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/06/books/review/american-marriage-tayari-jones.html
A Marriage Upended, a Life Destroyed - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2144
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Stephanie Powell WattsAN AMERICAN MARRIAGE By Tayari Jones 306 pp. Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. $26.95.Tayari Jones’s wise and compassionate new novel, “An American Marriage,” tells us a story we think we know. Roy, a young black man, is tried and wrongly convicted of rape while his wife, Celestial, waits for his return. But Jones’s story isn’t the one we are expecting, a courtroom drama or an examination of the prison-industrial complex; instead, it is a clear vision of the quiet devastation of a family. The novel focuses on the failed hopes of romantic love, disapproving in-laws, flawed families of origin, and the question of life with or without children that all married couples must negotiate. It is beautifully written, with many allusions to black music and culture — including the everyday poetry of the African-American community that begs to be heard.Celestial and Roy — in love, educated, middle-class members of the post-integration African-American generation — are decidedly upwardly mobile and unconcerned about issues of racial uplift and representation, though they have been chaptered and versed by their parents in the language of oppression. With Roy’s career “on the come-up,” as he describes it, and Celestial building a portfolio as an artist, they see a trajectory to become black rich, maybe even white rich. But after only 18 months of marriage, Roy is sentenced to 12 years in prison. The horror of this story lies in its banality: An innocent man, happily married, who does all the right things to succeed, is nonetheless sidelined to a concrete cell. The unfairness of the years stolen from this couple because of someone else’s mistake, the great cosmic error that derails Roy’s life, is the novel’s slow burn.Much of this story is told through the letters that Roy and Celestial write each other during and after his incarceration. Jones recreates the couple’s grief, despair and anger until they finally work their way to acceptance. This is complicated emotional territory navigated with succinctness and precision, making what isn’t said as haunting as the letters themselves.By design, we learn little about prison life or about the inmates except “Ghetto Yoda,” an old head who gives Roy advice and guidance. What we know for sure is that Roy’s life has disintegrated while Celestial finds financial and artistic success making dolls in Roy’s likeness. Her act of creation results in lifeless cloth babies that cannot provide succor or even connection to their inspiration. Celestial must ultimately decide if her approximation of a life and family is all she deserves.While Jones keeps her gaze on the personal, this intimate story of a relationship cannot be divorced from its racial context. The black body in America can’t escape the scrutiny of the political lens, not entirely. The characters feel lucky that Roy is still alive — as Celestial says, there is “no appealing a cop’s bullet.” While not a polemic, the novel gives us a quiet, revolutionary statement about black innocence, which Celestial defines as “having no way to predict the pain of the future.” The gains of younger generations of African-Americans have meant that middle-class lives are possible for some. However, as Roy discovers, his good parents, good choices and mostly good fortune do not shield him from the pain and caprice of the world. He becomes someone society dismisses, another down-and-out, snaggletoothed, unemployed ex-con. But Jones declares that maybe Roy doesn’t have to stay that way. Nearly every inmate now incarcerated in America will join us on the outside someday, and “An American Marriage” reminds us of this fact. It also warns us to awaken our compassion and empathy. This can be you, the story whispers. Forget that at your peril.Stephanie Powell Watts is the author of the novel “No One Is Coming to Save Us.”Advertisement