https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/07/learning/summer-reading-contest-winner-week-6-on-everyone-has-an-accent.html
Summer Reading Contest Winner, Week 6: On ‘Everyone Has an Accent’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2507
AdvertisementSupported byContestsBy The Learning NetworkThank you to the 1,041 teenagers who participated in the sixth week of our 10-week Summer Reading Contest, and congratulations to Lisa Mishra, our winner, as well as to our many runners-up and honorable mentions.Scroll down to take a look at the variety of topics — from Israel to dinosaurs, youth sports and summer jobs — that caught the eyes of our participants this week.And please remember to always check the top of our contest announcement to find the right place to participate, any week from now until Aug. 24.Lisa Mishra of Princeton, N.J., chose an article headlined “Everyone Has an Accent” and wrote:My mother came to the U.S. not only with the desire to give me a better future but also with a heavy Indian accent. It’s the accent that made me who I am today, the accent that helped me with my math homework and comforted me when I cried. For me, it’s perfect.As I grew up, though, I noticed smirks and giggles following my mother’s speech. I remember seeing an online ad that offered courses to “Get rid of your Indian accent today! Feel like a better American!” Knowing that there were courses designed to help people “get rid of” their accents suddenly made my mom’s pronunciation seem embarrassing.The hierarchy for accents became apparent at school too. Dull English sentences were transformed into something hilarious when said in a non-native accent. As students burst out laughing, I’d wear my unaccented English like a shield and say “Oh I don’t talk like that, so I’m not offended!” I lie, though; even if I don’t talk like that, my family does.This article not only put into words what has been a daily struggle for me but also gave me the strength to fight it. As the author puts it, “no one speaks without an accent,” so I shouldn’t be embarrassed of the one that raised me. The Indian accent will always be a part of my family identity, and I wouldn’t change that for anything, not even if it would make me feel like a better American.Paul Frank on “Please Take My Son’s Wallet”Donna Ghosh on “Forget Suits. Show the Tattoo. Female Candidates Are Breaking the Rules.”Jian Guan on “U.S. Eases Obama-Era Coal Ash Pollution Rules for Utilities”Brian Ham on “Kylian Mbappé and the Boys From the Banlieues”Huda Haque on “Everyone Has an Accent”Oma Jane on “How to Meet Autistic People Halfway”Maya Loeb on “Israeli Law Declares the Country the ‘Nation-State of the Jewish People’”Nishant Mishra on “The Virtues of a Summer Job”Emily Moulton on “Return of the Blood Libel”Victoria Otero on “What Is Sadness, and What Is Depression?”Asen Ou on “Endless Gaming May Be a Bad Habit. That Doesn’t Make It a Mental Illness.”Perezt on “1 Hen, 76 Ducklings: What’s the Deal With This Picture?”John R on “‘Simpsons’ Creator Matt Groening Says Debate Around Apu Is ‘Tainted’”Daniel Wei on “Israeli Law Declares the Country the ‘Nation-State of the Jewish People’”Isabelle Zhang on “Listen to ‘The Daily’: What Migrants Are Fleeing”_________Meher Bhatia on “Can Dirt Save the Earth?”Anna BHSAP2018 on “Einstein’s Theory of Relativity Passes Yet Another Test”Nia Bradley on “An Extremely Detailed Map of the 2016 Election”Noah Broderick on “The New York Yankees Are a Moral Abomination”Victor Chang on “How One Tweet About Nicki Minaj Spiraled Into Internet Chaos”Yuna Chung on “Parents Behaving Badly: A Youth Sports Crisis Caught on Video”Chrissy D on “Taking Away the Phones Won’t Solve Our Teenagers’ Problems”Esha Dhar on “Everyone Has an Accent”Michaela Fay on “Disgusted With Donald Trump? Do This”Skylar Gillies on “The Mystery of End-of-Life Rallies”GoBlue19Jean on “What to Do With a Perfect Avocado”Stephanie Min-Jae Kim on “The U.S. Can No Longer Hide From Its Deep Poverty Problem”Dina Krijestorac on “Ibtihaj Muhammad: The Olympic Fencer Is Charting Her Own Path”Lisa Liu on “New Clues to How the Biggest Dinosaurs Got So Big”mackenzie on “Psychology Itself Is Under Scrutiny”Diego Perez on “You’ve Heard of Berkeley. Is Merced the Future of the University of California?”Deven Polela on “City Releases Trove of Documents in Central Park Jogger Case”Andrew R. on “Trump to Invite Putin to Washington, Blindsiding His Intelligence Chief”Anna Salvatore on “More Than 100 Former Ohio State Students Allege Sexual Misconduct”Rahul Swaminathan on “When We Eat, or Don’t Eat, May Be Critical for Health”Advertisement