https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/19/learning/lesson-plans/project-audio-teaching-students-how-to-produce-their-own-podcasts.html
Project Audio: Teaching Students How to Produce Their Own Podcasts - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2495
AdvertisementSupported byBy Justin Hicks, Laura Winnick and Michael GoncharUpdated: April 18, 2019Given the recent rise in podcast popularity, it’s no surprise that audio narratives are making their way into the classroom. They offer an engaging way for teachers to merge project-based learning with digital media analysis and production skills.That’s why we run our annual Student Podcast Contest, in which we invite students to submit original podcasts, five minutes long or less. The 2019 contest runs from April 18 to May 21.The mini-unit below walks students through the process of analyzing the techniques that make for good storytelling, interviewing and podcasting. The activities culminate in students producing their own original podcasts.Note: For those teachers who may be technophobes, please don’t be intimidated by this technology-dependent lesson. Programs for audio editing are intuitive and easy-to-use, especially for many students. If you are a novice to audio recording, you may want to attempt to create your own one-minute podcast as a way to experience firsthand what students will encounter during the process._________In this section, students analyze the elements and techniques of both podcasting and storytelling, because stories are often at the heart of podcasts. Then, students practice telling a story aloud before moving on to interviewing in Part II.Warm Up: Elements of PodcastsPoll the class to see how many students are familiar with podcasts. If any students are, ask them to share their favorites. What did they enjoy about the podcasts they mentioned? What were the subjects? What elements of the podcasts do they remember: the interviews, conversations, music, sound effects or anything else?Next, while listening to each of these three short podcast excerpts (between one and three minutes), students should take notes using this notetaking sheet (PDF) on both the episode topic (what is being said or discussed) and the production elements (the various aspects of the podcast that create the listening experience).• Modern Love “R We D8ting? | With Krysten Ritter” (Segment: 1:00 - 3:16) • The Daily “The Right to Bear Arms” (Segment: 0:00 - 2:36)• Still Processing “Take a Knee if You Agree” (Segment: 0:00 - 1:27)After you listen to all three excerpts, share as a class. What did students notice about the subject matter? What did they notice about the formatting and techniques used within the podcast? How were the three podcast excerpts similar? How were they different?Mini-Lesson: Podcast ProjectSo students understand how these activities are building toward a larger goal, explain that the class will be creating original podcasts for this mini-unit. Students can work individually or in small groups. The podcasts must be five minutes or less — and while that might sound like a short amount of time, if students want to produce quality audio it really isn’t.The podcast topics can be inspired by one of the Learning Network’s 1,000-plus writing prompts. That should give everyone plenty of options, but if students don’t see the exact topic they want to investigate in their podcast, they can come up with their own topics.Finally, as the Warm Up activity demonstrated, there are many different types of podcasts. Some consist largely of conversations between the hosts; others are based on interviews; still others involve mostly storytelling, nonfiction or fiction. Podcasts serve different purposes too: some try to make you laugh; others aim to keep you in suspense; some want to educate or inform. Students should keep all of these possibilities in mind as they consider what they want their original podcast to be like.Activity: Elements of StorytellingStorytelling is a key ingredient in many podcasts, so we’re going to spend time in Part I introducing students to the art of telling an interesting story. Working in pairs or small groups, students should briefly discuss and take notes using this handout (PDF) about the elements and techniques of effective storytelling. The questions below can help start the discussion:Think about stories your parents, family or friends have told you — or that you heard on the radio or somewhere else. What are the elements and techniques of great storytelling? How can stories we hear, but can’t see, be sometimes even more powerful than stories dramatized or documented on TV or in film? Then they should listen to one or more of these short audio stories in their groups (and follow along with the transcript, if available). As they listen, students should continue taking notes on the same handout on what elements and techniques of storytelling are being used.• “When the Civil War Ended, She Was My Age” from StoryCorps• “The Coal Miner” from The World According to Sound• “Seeking an End to Cycles of Abuse” from Radio RookiesWhen you regroup as a class, ask students: What elements and techniques did you notice? Which ones do you think are the most essential to good storytelling? The class can compare its list with the elements of good storytelling included in this handout (PDF) and then add any elements or information the students think is missing.Activity: Telling a StoryNext, as an in class activity or homework, ask students to look over the Learning Network’s list of over 1,000 prompts. (If this list feels too big, we have various shorter versions for personal writing and argument writing, along with a stream of our most recent prompts.) Have them circle or highlight topics that interest them and that they might want to talk about or explore further in a podcast. They can select as many topics as they want, but should aim for at least five.For example, here are a few topics students might select:• Do You Know About Your Family’s History?• What Was Your Most Precious Childhood Possession?• What Ethical Dilemmas Have You Faced?• Are You Distracted by Your Phone?From their list, students should choose one question to tell a story about, as a way to practice storytelling. To prepare, they should first write down their ideas as a rough draft or outline.Then, they should practice telling their story to a partner. As partners listen, they should keep track of which elements and techniques of effective storytelling are being used (perhaps using the same handout), and provide feedback to one another after listening.Wrap UpHave the class share how the storytelling activity went. Did students incorporate the elements and techniques of effective storytelling discussed in class? If there’s time, invite a few students to present their stories to the rest of the class._________Students should now be at least a little familiar with the elements that make for good podcasts and storytelling. What’s next? Analyzing and practicing effective interviewing techniques, another ingredient central to many podcasts.Warm Up: One-Minute InterviewsFrom the list they already highlighted, ask students to choose a prompt they could pose as a podcast interview question. Tell students they are going to practice taking on the role of interviewer and interviewee, and they will have one minute to conduct an interview. Interviews should take up the entire minute, so if there is extra time, interviewers should be ready to ask follow-up questions.Set the timer to one minute and have students interview a partner. When time is up, have partners switch roles for the next minute.After both interviews are completed, discuss the activity as a class. How did the one-minute interviews go? Did the interviewee speak for the entire time? Did the interviewer ask any follow-up questions? What kinds of follow-up questions worked well? Students should take notes using this handout (PDF).Mini-LessonAs a class, watch this Radio Rookies video (above) about a particular type of interview — the vox pop, or on-the-street, interview. Students should continue adding notes on interview techniques. After the video, do a quick share.Activity: Elements of an InterviewVox pops are just one kind of interview. Often interviews are prepared, meaning the interviewee has time to think about the questions in advance (as opposed to the vox pop) and the interview includes multiple questions and takes place in a more formal, or at least quiet, setting.In their small groups, students should listen to the three brief audio clips below and take notes on the same handout.Invisibilia: Episode 1: Dark Thoughts (Segment: 0:00 - 2:40) The Daily: Fired Over an Instagram Post (Segment: 0:00 - 3:45) StoryCorps: Gregory Bess and April Gibson (Segment: 0:00 - 2:36)For “The Daily” episode, students might notice that the interview questions are sometimes edited out — so the listener just hears the interviewee’s responses. Students might even guess what the missing questions were.Then regroup as a class. What interviewing techniques did you hear? Which ones do you think are the most essential to good interviewing? Which techniques might be most helpful to you in making your podcasts? Make sure you discuss the difference between open-ended questions (which require more thought) and closed-ended questions (which elicit a simple one-word answer), and how the first kind makes for better interviews.Mini-Lesson: Using a Smartphone to RecordUntil now, we‘ve focused on the nontechnical aspects of podcasting, but to move forward we’ll need to make sure the class knows how to use recording devices. If you have fancy microphones or microcassette recorders, you can skip this next part. But if your students will be using their smartphones as personal recording devices, then make sure everyone is familiar with these basics:• First, smartphones will need to have a sound recording app. On Android, students can download a free voice recording app like “RecForge II” or “Audio Recorder.” For iPhones, in the extras folder, find the “Voice Memos” app.• Make sure students know where the microphone is on their phones.• Ask students to spread out and find a reasonably quiet space.• To begin recording, start by pressing the “Record” button or a red square. To finish, press the same button again. • Make sure to position the microphone about six inches away from the side of your subject’s mouth.• Check your audio, preferably with a pair of headphones. It should be free of background sound and loud enough to hear, but not so loud that it crackles. Record for 10 seconds and then play it back; adjust microphone position based on volume. • After you finish, make sure to enter a title for the recording and save it.• To get the file to your computer so you can edit it later on, use AirDrop, Bluetooth transfer, email or Google Drive upload.Activity: Recording an InterviewStudents are now ready to make their first recording. Working with their previous partners, students should record an interview, trying to get at least three minutes of recording. They can use the same questions they used during the one-minute interviews, or they can choose new questions from the prompt list. Remind them to use the best practices for interviewing and recording discussed earlier, including asking open-ended follow-up questions.After they finish recording their interviews, they should make sure their sound files are good quality and saved.As an alternative activity or homework assignment, students can conduct a series of vox pop interviews in an unstructured setting within the school, such as during recess, at lunchtime or in the hallways.Wrap UpDebrief the interview activity with students. How did the interviews go? Did they create quality sound recordings? Did they learn any useful strategies before they begin making their podcasts?_________Students can tell stories, they can interview and be interviewed, and they can record sound. Now it’s time to learn how to edit audio. By the end of this part of the mini-unit, students produce a practice one-minute podcast.Warm UpAsk students to listen to their recordings from the previous day using headphones. While they listen, they should write an outline of the recording, like this transcript from the Invisibilia podcast they already listened to. Since their outlines won’t be published, students don’t need to write down everything word for word and they can use plenty of ellipses or shorthand notes. These outlines will be helpful during the editing process. You may need to model for students how to make a very rough transcript or outline efficiently.Students will use these sound recordings to practice using editing software.Mini Lesson: Editing SoftwareEditing software is the tool that will help students turn their sound files into professional-sounding podcasts. With it, they can delete sections of audio, move audio segments around and stitch them together, and add additional sounds. They’ll need to practice using this software before moving forward with the podcast project. Depending on how many computers you have, students might work alone or in pairs.Note: Classes using Apple computers can use GarageBand, a free audio editing software. Other examples of free online audio editing software that can be used on Windows or Google devices include Audacity, Soundtrap (free for 14 days, then premium) and Beautiful Audio Editor. For each of these applications, there are tutorial videos available online. We recommend teachers become familiar with how to use basic features before diving into the editing process with students.Here are some of the basics of audio editing you should go over with students:1. Students will need sound files to edit. They can upload them from their recording devices, they can upload audio files from online or they can use the editing software to record new sound files. 2. The “cut” or “split” tool enables students to splice one audio segment into two or more segments. 3. The “delete” tool enables students to get rid of any audio segments they don’t want. 4. The dragging and moving function allows students to reposition audio segments where they want them. Typically students will use the mouse as a cursor to drag and move content.5. The timeline ruler or grid is the tool that measures the audio. Students use the timeline to assemble various audio segments into one project. 6. Tracks are layers of sound. Podcasts often have multiple tracks of audio playing simultaneously, such as music or sound effects played over spoken word. Students can align the various tracks using the timeline. 7. Volume can be adjusted in each audio segment. Students can also add effects, such as fade in or fade out. 8. “Save” and “Export” are important functions. Students must remember to save their work, and they will most likely want to export their project when they are done.Activity: One-Minute PodcastsThe best way for students to get practice using these tools is for them to play with them in a low-stakes way — thus, we suggest the one-minute podcast assignment. Students should take their three-minute recorded interviews and turn them into one-minute audio stories. They may want to cut out the actual interview questions; they may splice out parts of answers or move around sections; they may add additional narration or sound effects.We recommend this assignment as a timed activity — perhaps only one class period. Since it’s not the final project, the goal isn’t to produce a stellar podcast. Instead, it’s to make sure students become comfortable with the editing software.Wrap UpSave time to debrief with students about using the editing software. How did it go? Where did they stumble? What did they learn? If there’s time, you can play a few of the one-minute podcasts for the class.For homework, you can instruct students to look over the prompt list one more time to select their final podcast topic._________We’ve reached the final chapter of this mini-unit. Students are ready to come up with a topic, create a plan and produce their very own original podcasts.Warm Up: Topic BrainstormIf students already selected their podcast topics for homework, have them share during the Warm Up. If not, have them return to the prompt list to choose the one question they want to address in their podcast. If students will be working with partners, they should do this brainstorm as a team. If they don’t see a topic that interests them, they can come up with an original idea.Mini-Lesson: Planning a PodcastJust like writers do before starting an essay, podcast producers typically make an outline or plan before they start recording and editing. They brainstorm how they want to turn their topic into an audio story. What components will they need: spoken stories, interviews, narration?Before students get started producing their own podcasts, model how to plan a podcast from an initial question. You can use the beginning of Episode 538 from “This American Life” (Segment 0:00 - 4:20) and its transcript. While the class listens together, reveal a rough outline of the components that make up this segment.Narrator introduces a situation: A middle school student refuses to take off a hat in the classroom.Vox pop interview clips, interspersed with narration: Various teachers share how they might handle this situation.Music fades in ...Narrator introduces the larger topic of school discipline and the main question the podcast will address: Are school and teacher discipline policies working? Is there a better way?Music fades in ...After listening, discuss: What is the question this episode focuses on? What components do the producers use during this segment? How can a rough outline like this one help them plan their podcasts?Project Workshop Step 1: Planning a Podcast Students should fill out their own podcast planning form (PDF), beginning with their focus question. The form also asks students to think about narration, storytelling and interviewing. On the second page, students design a rough outline.Project Workshop Step 2: Gathering Audio Source MaterialOnce they have a plan, students need to go out and record their narration, stories and interviews. Some of this may take place during class time. Some of it may not.They should also gather any additional sound files they will want to use. Be sure to remind students to use non-copyrighted sound effects or music, though there are some limited fair use exceptions when they can legally use copyrighted work (such as when they are critiquing a song or reporting on a film). Students can find royalty-free music and sound effects like those on Bensound and Freesound, or they can create their own beats or melodies using their audio editing software.Project Workshop Step 3: Editing and PublishingOnce they have all their needed sound files, the last step is to use audio editing software to pull the pieces together into a final podcast, five minutes long or less. Please be forewarned: Editing can be a time-consuming process.When the podcasts are ready, you can upload them to one of many hosting sites. SoundCloud offers free podcast hosting and so do Buzzsprout, Podomatic and Spreaker, with limitations. Here’s an example of how one teacher shares her students’ podcast projects with the world.Podcast CelebrationAfter all this hard work, we hope students can celebrate what they’ve accomplished. Perhaps you want to have a podcast listening party, where you spend a class period listening to all the projects. You can even invite parents or guests. Or, if time is short, you can let groups of students listen to each other’s podcasts using headphones. Either way, you may want to give students a chance to offer feedback on one another’s work._________Resources Around the Web for Teaching Podcasting and Listening SkillsNPR | Starting Your Podcast: A Guide For StudentsNPR | Teaching Podcasting: A Curriculum Guide for EducatorsKQED’s Podcasting With Youth RadioRadio RookiesListenwiseLearning Network Lesson Plans On Podcasting and Listening SkillsExperimenting With Sound and Story: Teaching and Learning With ‘The Daily’ PodcastActive Listening: Using Times Videos, Podcasts and Articles to Practice a Key Skill_________Laura Winnick teaches English at the Urban Assembly Maker Academy, a  public high school in Manhattan, where she brings in podcast pedagogy as a creative, research-based summative assessment.Justin Hicks attends New York University’s graduate school for journalism and produces freelance audio stories. Every Saturday, he produces a podcast with middle and high school students in Harlem where students report, edit and mix their very own audio stories.Advertisement