http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/12/arts/music/vince-staples-and-j-cole-outsiders-in-the-middle-of-hip-hop.html
Vince Staples and J. Cole, Outsiders in the Middle of Hip-Hop - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1226
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jon CaramanicaThe song by J. Cole you’re currently most likely to hear coming out of a car window is called “Wet Dreamz.” It’s about him losing his virginity, certainly the highest-profile hip-hop song on that delicate subject.Mr. Cole tackles it with gusto and a not insignificant amount of awkward detail, rapping about teaching himself to put on a condom, studying pornography to learn technique and agonizing over whether he’ll be up to the task. His flow is raspy and conversational, not swaggering at all, and the song is slow, slightly sleepy soul. When you hear it on Hot 97, in between the digital vocal cascades of Fetty Wap, the self-satisfied Drake loosies and the meanspirited Chris Brown choruses, it sounds disruptive. It’s a deviation from mainstream hip-hop’s norm, a rejection of its surroundings.Two decades ago, an artist like that would have happily resigned himself to the underground, hardened his integrity and obscurity into weapons, and rained judgment and insult upon those at the center.And yet the album that song comes from, “2014 Forest Hills Drive” (Roc Nation/Columbia), Mr. Cole’s third, was last year’s top-selling rap album. To date it’s sold about 950,000 copies, his first platinum album after two gold ones. Next month, Mr. Cole will perform at Madison Square Garden, a show that sold out on the first day of ticket sales. By those measurements, Mr. Cole is undeniably in the top tier of current hip-hop stars. Statistics don’t tell nearly the whole story, though.As with all things, the Internet has helped to flatten hip-hop — more artists and styles are available to more people, obscurity is a relic, subcultural allegiance can quickly become pop fandom. The logical outcome of that circumstance has been the rise of Drake, an omnivore and a chameleon who never met a target demographic he couldn’t appease, or an Instagram post for which a lyric of his wouldn’t make the perfect caption. He’s post-region, post-era, post-ideology, post-genre.Turns out that’s a tricky thing to replicate, though. As Drake sets the tenor for what’s happening at the genre’s center, around him hip-hop is splintering along old fault lines in new fashion, seen most clearly in the ascendance of Mr. Cole and Kendrick Lamar, two of the best-selling rappers of the 2010s but who have been largely shut out of hip-hop’s celebrity class. And entering into this conversation is Vince Staples, a young rapper from Long Beach, Calif., who’s a possible heir to this movement. At its best, his new major label debut album, “Summertime ’06” (Blacksmith/ARTium/Def Jam), is exceptional, a modern gangster rap classic full of cleareyed detail and tart social commentary. Call them representatives of hip-hop’s silent majority, beneficiaries of enough protest votes (via those old meters of success, album and ticket sales) that their staunch commitment to traditionally underground sentiment has turned out to be lucrative, and also necessitates a rethinking of where hip-hop’s current center of power and influence actually resides.Their victories underscore the clear self-segregating echo chamber that is hip-hop’s mainstream, which relies upon and perpetuates narratives of triumph and conceitedness. For the most part, Mr. Cole and Mr. Lamar have worked against those values, and they’ve been punished for it.Each of Mr. Cole’s albums has topped the Billboard album chart. He’s never placed a single in the Top 10, though, even the platinum-selling ones. Mr. Lamar has had parallel success and failures. He’s released two major label albums — his 2012 debut, “good kid, m.A.A.d. city” (Top Dawg/Aftermath/Interscope) has sold 1.44 million copies and peaked at No. 2 on the album chart; this year’s follow-up, “To Pimp a Butterfly,” debuted at No. 1 and has sold 627,000 copies thus far. (All sales information is according to Nielsen SoundScan.) But he, too, has never had a Top 10 hit of his own. (Let’s not even discuss the verse he added to Taylor Swift’s “Bad Blood,” or his dead-eyed appearance in the song’s video.)What this highlights is a system in which mainstream hip-hop, as understood mainly through the radio, fiercely protects its dominant narrative by suppressing the stories of its most socially provocative artists. Album-oriented artists aren’t inherently more valuable than singles-oriented artists. Socially minded artists aren’t inherently more valuable than socially unconcerned artists. Lyrics-focused artists aren’t inherently more valuable than melodically driven ones. But a hip-hop mainstream that acknowledges success in only some of those arenas is lacking, and lying.Mr. Lamar and Mr. Cole are both inheritors of golden-age traditions, a conservative position that today feels radical. Mr. Cole, who produces as well as raps, feels like more of a deliberate conscientious objector than Mr. Lamar, who doesn’t have much of an ear for the accessible. They both, though, are pushing hard to reshape what the genre, in word and in sound, should be used for.Sure, Kanye West and then Drake — true superstars, both — brought anxiety, vulnerability and insecurity into hip-hop’s center, but only within a broader context of their ecstatic, king-size success. Neither Mr. Cole nor Mr. Lamar frame their internal battles this way. Mr. Cole is, at best, fretful about what fame has done to him, and his allergy to glitz — one of his biggest hits is about his crooked teeth — makes him something of an easy punching bag for the chattering classes. In the genre’s pecking order, Mr. Cole is somewhere beneath Rick Ross, Meek Mill, Big Sean, even Wale — all artists he easily outsells.Mr. Lamar is higher up that chain, but only by dint of sticking to his guns. He’s become a messiah for social progressives, a hero for wordplay-obsessed classicists, and a beacon for musical experimenters — in other words, he serves all the outlier groups. Added together, that’s no small feat. This isn’t the only hip-hop counternarrative that’s been gaining traction in recent years — just as fascinating has been the rise of singles-driven club-pop rappers like Pitbull and Flo Rida, or the complicated dynamics at play in the rise of white rappers like Macklemore and Iggy Azalea.But even though those movements are remolding the shape of hip-hop writ large, their battles are over different turf. More reflective of the ongoing square-off near the center was the recent molehill-sized flare-up between the Brooklyn rappers Joey Badass, a dedicated 1990s-underground revivalist, and Troy Ave, forever in thrall to 50 Cent’s goofiest crossover period. This was a battle of aesthetic values, but more specifically, a nerd vs. jock squabble. Is it any surprise that Joey Badass sells exponentially more albums than Troy Ave does, but Troy Ave gets played on Hot 97?Given the decreasing commercial power of old guard stars from Eminem to Mr. Ross to Lil Wayne to even Mr. West, there are now fewer people jockeying for position at the top than at any time in recent memory, which means that rising generations may begin to regard Mr. Lamar and Mr. Cole as the alphas they actually are.As for Mr. Staples, his album is one in a recent string of outstanding homages to and resuscitations of the gangster rap of the early 1990s, a list that includes Mr. Lamar’s “good kid” and YG’s “My Krazy Life” (Pushaz Ink/CTE/Def Jam).Mr. Staples deploys voyeurism and skepticism in equal measure on this album: “Dollar and a dream, at night time we maskin’ up/The deadly game of tag the older generations passed to us,” he raps on “3230.” He’s a casually intricate rapper — he often achieves as much as Mr. Lamar does with less sweat.The most arresting songs on this album highlight the ruminations of someone who understands the flaws of the ecosystem he was raised in but understands even more clearly the flaws of the bigger ecosystem that created it. Take “C.N.B.,” a bleak sermon on black cultural death:We gentrified, we victimized, we fighting for survivalNo hopes and dreams, just leave us be, we leaning on the BibleThey preying on us, praying for a better day tomorrowHide the fear behind this here bravadoEven “Summertime,” one of the love songs here, is poisoned by Mr. Staples’s surroundings: “Hope you understand, they never taught me how to be a man/Only how to be a shooter, I only need the time to prove it.”In addition to rapping under his given name, Mr. Staples has a few other things in common with Mr. Lamar and Mr. Cole, among them a robust understanding for how white participation in hip-hop — as producers but also consumers — can help keep certain narratives fixed. His video for “Senorita,” is full of abject misery, with black and brown bodies dropping lifeless to the ground. At the end, though, the camera pulls back to reveal a white family sitting on a bench, watching everything unfold behind glass. Like Mr. Lamar and Mr. Cole, he understands that whoever is doing the listening generally dictates what stories get to be told, and also which ones are left out, fighting for air.Advertisement