https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/02/opinion/sunday/jews-pittsburgh-anti-semitism-prayer.html
Opinion | American Jews Know How This Story Goes - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2920
AdvertisementSupported byThe way forward from Pittsburgh is written in our prayer books.By Dara HornMs. Horn is the author of five novels.“There are no words.”This was what I heard most often last weekend from those who were stunned by the news: 11 people were murdered at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh — believed to be the largest massacre of Jews on American soil. But there are words for this, entire books full of words: the books the murdered people were reading at the hour of their deaths. News reports described these victims as praying, but Jewish prayer is not primarily personal or spontaneous. It is communal reading. Public recitations of ancient words, scripts compiled centuries ago and nearly identical in every synagogue in the world. A lot of those words are about exactly this.When I told my children what had happened, they didn’t ask why; they knew. “Because some people hate Jews,” they said. How did these American children know that? They shrugged. “It’s like the Passover story,” my 9-year-old told me. “And the Hanukkah story. And the Purim story. And the Babylonians, and the Romans.” My children are descendants of Holocaust survivors, but they didn’t go that far forward in history. The words were already there.The people murdered in Pittsburgh were mostly old, because the old are the pillars of Jewish life, full of days and memories. They are the ones who come to synagogue first, the ones who know the words by heart. The oldest victim was Rose Mallinger, 97.The year Ms. Mallinger was born was the tail end of the mass migration of more than two million Eastern European Jews to America between 1881 and 1924. Many brought with them memories of pogroms, of men invading synagogues with weapons, of blood on holy books. This wasn’t shocking, because it was already described in those books. On Yom Kippur in synagogue, these Jews read the stories of rabbis murdered by the Romans, including Rabbi Hanina ben Tradyon, who was wrapped in a Torah scroll set aflame. Before dying, he told his students, “The parchment is burning, but the letters are flying free!”My synagogue’s old prayer book hints at what these stories meant to American Jews Ms. Mallinger’s age. Its 1939 English preface to those stories of murdered rabbis asks: “Who can forget, even after decades, the sight of his father huddled in the great prayer shawl and trying in vain to conceal the tears which flowed down his cheeks during the recital of this poem?” By the time I was a kid reciting those poetic stories, no one was crying. Instead my siblings and I smirked at the excessive gory details, the violence unfamiliar enough to be absurd. But Rabbi Hanina must have been right, because we still were reading from that same scroll, the same words Jews first taught the world: Do not oppress the stranger. Love your neighbor as yourself.People Ms. Mallinger’s age were in their 20s when word spread about mass murders of Jews in Europe. In synagogue on Rosh Hashana, they read the old words begging God for compassion, “for the sake of those killed for your holy name,” and “for the sake of those slaughtered for your uniqueness.” My husband’s grandparents came here after those massacres, their previous spouses and children slaughtered like the people in the prayer. They kept reciting the prayer, and for their new American family it reverted to metaphor. In the decades that followed, Jews from other places joined American synagogues, many bringing memories that American Jews had forgotten. Those memories were waiting for them in the synagogue’s books. On the holiday of Purim, they recited the Book of Esther, about an ancient Persian leader’s failed attempt at a Jewish genocide. It’s a time for costumes and levity, for shaking noisemakers to blot out the evildoer’s name. One year my brother dressed as the ayatollah, and the Persians in our congregation laughed. Another year someone dressed as Gorbachev; the Russians loved it. The evildoers seemed defeated.In 2000, when Ms. Mallinger was 79, a Jewish senator was his party’s nominee for vice president. A year later the White House hosted its first official Hanukkah party. About a decade later I attended one myself. In the White House we recited ancient words thanking God for rescuing us from hatred. To older Jews, this felt miraculous: My parents and grandfather gawked at my photos, awe-struck. But at the party I met younger Jewish leaders who often attended these events. To them, this was normal. The ancient hatred was a memory, words on a page.Or maybe it wasn’t. In 2001, after terrorists attacked American cities, concrete barriers sprouted in front of my family’s synagogue, police cruisers parked in the lot. This felt practical in a nation on edge; we assumed it affected everyone. As my children were born and grew, the barriers and guards became their normal. When I took my children to an interfaith Thanksgiving service at a church down the street from our synagogue, one of them asked me why no one was guarding the door.In the years that followed, the internet suddenly allowed anyone to say whatever he wanted, rewarding the most outrageous from every political stripe. Soon, comments sections became an open sewer, flowing with centuries-old garbage — and as social media exploded, those comments scaled up to the open vitriol of the past few years. To young Jews this felt confusing. To old Jews it must have felt familiar, a memory passed down and repeated in the holy books. When Ms. Mallinger was 97, she and 10 other Jews were murdered in their synagogue. There are words for this too, a Hebrew phrase for 2,500 years’ worth of people murdered for being Jews: kiddush hashem, death in sanctification of God’s name.My children were right: This story is old, with far too many words. Yet they were wrong about one thing. In the old stories, those outside the community rarely helped or cared; our ancestors’ consolation came only from one another and from God. But in this horrific week, perhaps our old words might mean something new.When they return to synagogue, mourners will be greeted with more ancient words: “May God comfort you among the mourners of Zion and Jerusalem.” In that verse, the word used for God is hamakom — literally, “the place.” May the place comfort you.May the people in this place comfort you: the first responders who rushed to your rescue, the neighbors who overwhelmed evil with kindness, the Americans of every background who inspire more optimism than Jewish history allows. May this country comfort you, with its infinite promise. As George Washington vowed in his 1790 letter to a Rhode Island synagogue, America shall be a place where “every one shall sit in safety under his own vine and fig tree, and there shall be none to make him afraid.” Those words aren’t his. They’re from the Hebrew prophet Micah, on the shelves of every synagogue in the world.This week in synagogue as always, we read from the scroll we call the Tree of Life, and the place will comfort us. As we put the book away, we repeat the words from Lamentations: “Renew our days as of old.”Dara Horn is the author of five novels, most recently “Eternal Life.”Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement