https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/06/upshot/should-your-baby-really-sleep-in-the-same-room-as-you.html
Should Your Baby Really Sleep in the Same Room as You? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1357
AdvertisementSupported byRest EasyBy Claire Cain Miller and Aaron E. CarrollNew parents get a lot of advice. It comes from breast-feeding “lactivists” and Ferberizers, attachment parents and anti-helicopter ones. It’s not enough to keep babies fed, rested and changed — they also need to learn grit and sign language.So when the American Academy of Pediatrics recently issued new infant sleep guidelines — highlighting a recommendation that babies sleep in their parents’ rooms for at least six months but ideally a full year — some parents despaired.The academy said that sharing a room could cut babies’ chance of dying in their sleep by “up to 50 percent.” Suffocation, strangulation or sudden infant death syndrome, known as SIDS, kills 3,500 babies a year in this country. The academy’s previous recommendations — place babies on their backs to sleep, without loose bedding, in their own cribs — have been an undisputed success in helping to cut SIDS deaths by 53 percent from 1992 to 2001, but SIDS is still the largest cause of infant mortality in the United States after the first month of life.Yet the recommendation drew skepticism from some doctors, who argued that a close look at the evidence showed that the benefits of room-sharing didn’t always justify its costs to parents, who would have to sacrifice privacy, sex and, above all, sleep.Sharing a room can make breast-feeding and bonding easier. It has historically been common around the world, and many parents do it by choice or necessity. But the evidence is not conclusive, and doctors need to understand the trade-offs before demanding that parents follow the recommendation. Doing so will be part of making parenthood possible in a society in which most parents work, yet receive less government support than in any other industrialized country.In our own families, when our babies were born, we both kept them in a bassinet near our beds for the first couple of months — until we couldn’t take it anymore. We moved them to their own rooms because we thought it would be better for them: They would get more of the uninterrupted sleep they needed, and learn the important skill of putting themselves to sleep. But we also moved them because it was better for our own sleep. Babies grunt, flail and hiccup at night. We had other children, jobs and responsibilities, and we needed rest, too.Depriving parents of good sleep can also endanger babies. Sleep-deprived people can have decreased empathy. Sleep deprivation is associated with an increase in car accidents (which are a top killer of older children). It stresses marriages and families and is significantly associated with an increased risk of postpartum depression. Hawley Montgomery-Downs, a professor of psychology and pediatrics at West Virginia University, has found that sleep-deprived parents have impairments similar to drunkenness. Americans are unlikely to have much paid parental leave, if any, and going to work exhausted serves no one well.Dr. Fern R. Hauck, a professor of family medicine at the University of Virginia and a member of the task force that prepared the new policy, said the panel hadn’t given great thought to parents’ sleep before issuing the recommendation. “Parents will probably need to get used to it,” she said.She said the recommendations covered a year “to be on the prudent side,” but that the first six months were most important because that’s when the risk of SIDS is highest.“We don’t know why, but it appears to be protective to have baby sleeping in the same room as parents, not in the same bed but in the same room,” Dr. Hauck said.To back this up, the academy cited three studies and an out-of-print book, “Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS): New Trends in the Nineties.” This is the same evidence the academy cited in 2011, when it also recommended room-sharing, but less prominently.The three studies are case-control studies. That means researchers compiled records of babies who died of SIDS and matched them as closely as possible, based on things like age or geography. Then, by comparing the groups, they tried to identify factors that might place babies at higher risk.Case-control studies are among the weaker designs used in human research. They can only indicate association, not causation, and they are especially susceptible to “recall bias,” when people remember things differently based on outcomes. People who have had a baby die, for instance, are more likely to have pored over any details that might have contributed.Unfortunately, when it comes to SIDS, case-control studies are pretty much our only option. Even though SIDS is a large cause of infant mortality, very few babies die of it each year. We would never be able to enroll enough babies in a controlled trial to test interventions.The first of the three studies was published in 1999 in The British Medical Journal. It matched 325 cases of SIDS against 1,300 controls, or babies who did not die of SIDS, in England. The second study, published in The Lancet in 2004, included 745 cases and 2,411 controls from 20 regions in Europe. The third, published in The Journal of Pediatrics in 2005, compared 123 cases to 263 controls in Scotland. All three found, to varying degrees, that infants who slept in a separate room had a significantly higher rate of SIDS than those who shared a room with their parents.The first thing to note is that they all collected data in the 1990s, when SIDS was much more common than it is today. The academy said room-sharing “decreases the risk of SIDS by as much as 50 percent,” but that was before the significant improvement in SIDS rates. It’s not clear that sharing a bedroom would make as much of a difference today as it did then.The second is these were all studies in Europe, where room-sharing is much more common. Only about 20 percent to 41 percent of infants in the control group slept in their own rooms. That makes it hard to pinpoint the reason they survived, and to generalize the findings to the United States.As the incidence of SIDS continues to decline, there may be diminishing returns in trying to prevent every last case. While we want to do all we can to prevent SIDS, we should do so in ways that are likely to work — and unlikely to cause harm.Pediatricians said they were taking the new guidelines seriously, but would talk with their patients about finding this balance. “That’s why you see your pediatrician: You go through the risk and benefit of everything you’re choosing to do and make choices that maximize everybody’s health and well-being,” said Dr. Lee Atkinson-McEvoy, a professor and associate division chief of pediatrics at the University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine.Doctors will also have to reassure parents who may now be even more stressed than normal. This recommendation leaves them with the sense that they’re supposed to watch over their babies at every sleeping, as well as waking, moment. That’s not only impossible, but it assigns blame to things that might be out of parents’ control. With the demands of modern-day child-rearing, parents feel enough guilt already.Aaron E. Carroll is a professor of pediatrics at Indiana University School of Medicine who blogs on health research and policy at The Incidental Economist and makes videos at Healthcare Triage. Follow him on Twitter at @aaronecarroll.The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. Sign up for our newsletter.Advertisement