http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/13/nyregion/after-much-debate-a-picasso-tapestry-is-headed-to-the-new-york-historical-society.html
After Much Debate, Picasso Curtain Will Be Moved From the Four Seasons - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2300
AdvertisementSupported byBy Charles V. BagliOne of New York City’s largest and most public artworks is headed for a new home, bringing to an end L’Affaire Tricorne.A 19-by-20-foot stage curtain painted by Pablo Picasso has been at the center of a long-running dispute between the New York Landmarks Conservancy, which owns the piece, and Aby J. Rosen, the owner of the landmark Seagram Building on Park Avenue, where it has hung since 1959.Mr. Rosen, a prominent figure in real estate, art and society circles, wanted to take it away, while the conservancy feared that the 95-year-old artwork, known as “Le Tricorne,” was too fragile to move.Art lovers, real estate moguls and preservationists chose sides as the two parties went to court.Mr. Rosen has been on the losing side of the international media attention, with commentators bewailing the fate of what they described as “one of the greatest works, by one of the greatest artists.” One reviewer, however, did wonder about the fuss, saying the curtain was “a hand-me-down Picasso.”After weeks of negotiations, Mr. Rosen and Peg Breen, president of the conservancy, struck a deal this week under which the Picasso would relocate to the New-York Historical Society.There, one of the largest works by Picasso in the United States will become the centerpiece of the society’s second-floor gallery.“It will be great for us to show the piece as a work of art and as an artifact of a time and place,” said Louise Mirrer, president of the historical society. “New York is a tear-down, buildup city. We house the artifacts of whatever past has vanished.”The historical society serves as an oversize attic for the city’s history, with two million manuscripts, 500,000 photographs and the original 432 watercolors of John James Audubon’s “Birds of America.”Mr. Rosen, the chairman of the state’s Council on the Arts and the owner of a personal collection estimated to be worth over $500 million, will pay for the delicate job of taking down the artwork from a glass-walled hallway of the Four Seasons restaurant at the Seagram Building. Mr. Rosen, who declined to comment, will also pay to clean and restore the artwork.Ms. Breen said she was grateful that the historical society had stepped forward to safeguard the work and thanked Mr. Rosen for his assistance.The curtain, which was painted by Picasso for the dance patron Serge Diaghilev and the Ballets Russes in 1919, has been tied to the Four Seasons since it opened in 1959. Christie’s has valued the work at $1.6 million.Phyllis Lambert, daughter of Samuel Bronfman, founder of the Seagram liquor empire, acquired the artwork in 1957 while involved in the design of the building and the Four Seasons. The restaurant, gilded with works of modern art, quickly became a lunchtime meeting place for celebrities and titans of industry. She and the architect Philip Johnson had the Picasso hung on a wall that connects the restaurant’s two dining rooms.Ms. Lambert is unhappy about the turn of events. “It sort of breaks my heart,” she said.Vivendi bought the Seagram company, including its large art collection, in 2000, around the time Mr. Rosen bought the Seagram Building. Later, the financially ailing Vivendi moved to sell the entire Seagram art collection, but Ms. Lambert persuaded Vivendi to bequeath the Picasso to the conservancy.Last November, Mr. Rosen notified the conservancy that he intended to remove the Picasso to fix a leaking steam pipe in the wall behind the curtain. At the same time, Mr. Rosen began talks with the owners of the restaurant, which he believes is in need of modernization.The conservancy took him to court, claiming that the leaking pipe was an excuse to permanently remove the artwork.No stranger to art controversy, Mr. Rosen recently set off another art-related uproar in Old Westbury, N.Y., after he installed a 33-foot sculpture of a naked woman by Damien Hirst outside his home.To move the Picasso, workers will mount hydraulic lifts to detach the top of the curtain from the wall. It will then be wrapped around a wide roller, starting at the bottom. The curtain will first go to a conservator, for cleaning and restoration work. The historical society plans to have it installed for an exhibition in May.“Having a good home really is the happy ending,” Ms. Breen said.An article in some editions on June 13 about a preservation deal in which “Le Tricorne,” a tapestry painted by Picasso, will be sent to the New-York Historical Society, erroneously attributed a distinction to the piece. While it is one of Picasso’s bigger works, it is not his largest in the United States. (That is “Tête,” an iron sculpture on display in Chicago.)Advertisement