https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/17/opinion/elizabeth-warren-and-the-folly-of-genetic-ancestry-tests.html
Opinion | Elizabeth Warren and the Folly of Genetic Ancestry Tests  - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
895
AdvertisementSupported byDNA can’t tell us about identity. By Alondra NelsonDr. Nelson is the author of “The Social Life of DNA: Race, Reparations and Reconciliation After the Genome.”This week, Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts announced that geneticists had analyzed her DNA and proved her longstanding claim that she has Native American ancestry. Senator Warren had caved in to months of ridicule by President Trump, who mocked her using a racist term and ultimately refused to believe her “useless” DNA test. The question is not whether her DNA analysis is accurate. It’s whether it can tell us anything meaningful about identity. The truth is that sets of DNA markers cannot tell us who we really are because genetic data is technical and identity is social. The science in question is a form of chromosome mapping similar to that used in the billion-dollar genetic ancestry testing industry in the United States. That testing draws on incomplete data about human genetic diversity. In this case, the “reference set” included samples drawn from 37 people “from across the Americas with Native American ancestry.” Nevertheless, this genetic analysis did locate five chromosome segments that strongly suggest indigenous ancestry. In his report, the geneticist Carlos Bustamante of Stanford University cautioned that it did not “provide complete coverage of all Native American groups.” This is a limitation of the technology, but it also has political implications. Indigenous communities have long engaged in a “politics of refusal,” according to a Mohawk anthropologist, Audra Simpson. They have opted out of research and commercial endeavors that seek to assemble genetic samples of their communities. And they refuse to support practices that reduce Native American ancestry, culture and history to mere segments of DNA. Tribal sovereignty and indigenous authority determine membership and indigenous understandings of community.Senator Warren’s genetic-ancestry results suggest she has a Native American ancestor, most likely more than six generations back. But a few segments of a person’s genome that indicate she may have indigenous ancestry does not make her Native American. To be Native American is to be a member of a tribal community and recognized by that community as such. DNA cannot vouchsafe tribal identity or any other community affiliation. When we’re faced with difficult issues about the past that bear on the present, it is tempting to take these tests as proof of identity. But these genetic tests cannot confirm social dynamics. Identity is socially, politically and legally determined, even if shaped by genetics. Yet, genetic ancestry testing does not offer insights about these dynamics. So we can’t look to DNA to settle debates about identity.Indeed, the Warren news teaches us that genetic ancestry testing is an inexact but powerful political instrument. It’s a tool for making and contesting social claims — not for verifying family history. The Warren case is not the first to use genetic analysis in the realm of political culture. Nor is this the first time that genetic ancestry analysis has ventured into presidential politics. Y-chromosome analysis, which can trace patrilineage from biological fathers to sons, was used 20 years ago in an influential and controversial Nature article that declared President Thomas Jefferson had most likely fathered a child with a slave. Years later, the genetic genealogy of both the first lady Michelle Obama and President Barack Obama were also excavated, cementing the relationship between presidential politics and genetic ancestry testing.Previously, genetics ancestry testing was used to adjudicate competing historical claims or to play a role in the genealogical mythmaking central to presidential politics. The Warren case represents the worrisome politicization of genetic ancestry. With this incident we’re faced with a kind of catch-22: Genetic ancestry testing is demanded as proof and then denied as proof. Senator Warren has ushered in a new norm in which political claims now include the genetic ancestry data as proof of identity — technical knowledge substituted for a social fact. But DNA ancestry testing is not definitive, and Senator Warren’s move sets a dangerous precedent for a public more inclined to believe feel-good advertisements for direct-to-consumer genetic ancestry testing companies than the nuanced details of chromosome mapping. This is also worrisome because the social life of DNA, the ability of DNA to be used in ways other than its original intent, is moving into the criminal justice system and elsewhere, as the recent uses of the family history website GEDmatch and other genealogical databases show. We should resist the pressure to publicly disclose our personal genetic information, even in the charged theater of national politics.In the end, what does Senator Warren’s genetic ancestry tests prove? That identity is dynamic and political. Alondra Nelson (@alondra) is the president of the Social Science Research Council and a professor of sociology at Columbia. Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misquoted a headline on a 1998 study into the parentage of the children of Thomas Jefferson's slave Sally Hemings. The headline said, "Jefferson fathered slave's last child," not "fathered children with a slave.” In addition, an earlier version of this article overstated the findings of the study. The researchers said that Jefferson was most likely the father of Hemings's child, but that other male members of the Jefferson line could not be ruled out.Advertisement