https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/learning/summer-reading-contest-winner-week-3-on-the-muggle-problem.html
Summer Reading Contest Winner, Week 3 | On ‘The Muggle Problem’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2511
AdvertisementSupported byContestsBy The Learning NetworkThank you to the 546 teenagers who participated in the third week of our 10-week Summer Reading Contest, and congratulations to Kaya Dierks, our winner, as well as to our many runners-up and honorable mentions.Scroll down to take a look at the variety of topics — from Katy Perry and hot dogs to the immigration ban and the N.R.A. — that caught the eyes of our participants.And remember, you can choose anything published on NYTimes.com in 2017, including any of the pieces linked below, to participate yourself, anytime until Aug. 24. Just check the top of our contest announcement to find the right place to post.Kaya Dierks of San Francisco, Calif., chose the Op-Ed “The Muggle Problem,” and wrote:In his zealous takedown of “Harry Potter,” Ross Douthat comes to a very “muggled” conclusion.In his June 28 piece “The Muggle Problem,” Douthat asserts that the wizarding community is a metaphor for a liberal academia while muggles represent an uneducated working class. Since global problems in “Harry Potter” are solved inside the wizarding world, he claims that using the books as a metaphor will lead readers to the incorrect conclusion that modern political issues can be settled within an intellectual elite. He thus dismisses the books as “childish,” arguing that the actions of a majority, not a minority, are what matters.He’s wrong.“Harry Potter” explores the fear, humiliation and desperation that lead people to join violent hate groups. Just like members of historical fascist parties, the “purebloods” who become “Death Eaters,” or wizarding terrorists, blame their loss of magical power and status on a scapegoat: supposedly lesser-born wizards with non-magical ancestry.The series is a sophisticated social studies lesson disguised by spells, sorting hats and flying cars. The novels have an essential message about how fascist governments rise to power - an extreme minority consuming a majority.That’s why the books are more relevant than ever. The Trump administration’s corruption and cronyism, treatment of certain minority groups, and disregard for the free press echo Hitler’s war on truth - and Voldemort’s war on muggles. It’s time to remember “Harry Potter.”Andrew Siyoon Ham on “Keeping The Times Civil, 16 Million Comments and Counting”Naomi K on “Animal Welfare Groups Have a New Tool: Virtual Reality”Katie Mazzolini on “Administration Moves to Carry Out Partial Travel Ban”Cali Sullivan on “That Diss Song Known as ‘Yankee Doodle’”Alexis Szymczyk on “New ‘Hamilton Mixtape’ Music Video Takes Aim at Immigration”Joyce Zhou on “My Dad’s Sudden Outburst: ‘I Love You’”Bengal11Grace092201 on “China’s Vision for a Straddling Bus Dissolves in Scandal and Arrests.”bengal11Haley091501 on “Going to a New Jersey State Park or Beach? Not This Holiday Weekend"Christopher Cicchiello on “Phone Booths Are Back in Times Square. No Quarters Required.”Emil Firat on “On London’s Streets, Black Cabs and Uber Fight for a Future”Mia Glass on “New York Today: Washing Windows, 900 Feet Up”Wyatt Hullopeter on “Gucci’s Diversity Drag”Samia Menon on ”Katy Perry, Lorde and Halsey: How to Make a Pop Album in 2017”Lisa Mishra on “Police Officer Is ‘Murdered for Her Uniform’ in the Bronx”Abby R on “To Stay in Love, Sign on the Dotted Line”Sireesh Ramesh on ”Democrats’ Turnout in Georgia Blew Past Typical Off-Year Levels”Makenzi Umphenour on ”In a Remote Village, Witnessing Miracles”Fiona Wu on “We Taste-Tested 10 Hot Dogs. Here Are the Best.”Liyu Berhanu Woldemichael on “N.R.A. Ad Condemning Protests Against Trump Raises Partisan Anger”Advertisement