https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/28/us/politics/trump-central-america-immigration.html
Trump Criticizes Central American Nations on Border Security - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2560
AdvertisementSupported byBy Eileen SullivanWASHINGTON — President Trump criticized Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras on Thursday for accepting monetary aid from the United States but doing nothing in return, a day after his homeland security secretary struck what she described as a historic agreement with three of those same countries to help strengthen security on the United States’ southwestern border.Mr. Trump also threatened to close the border, a move he has previously considered, which would have a significant economic impact by disrupting the flow of trade and labor.Mexico is doing NOTHING to help stop the flow of illegal immigrants to our Country. They are all talk and no action. Likewise, Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador have taken our money for years, and do Nothing. The Dems don’t care, such BAD laws. May close the Southern Border!Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen met on Tuesday with Mexican officials in Miami and on Wednesday  with Central American officials in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, to discuss the humanitarian crisis and what the Trump administration considers a security emergency at the United States-Mexico border.“I’m pleased to announce the U.S. & our Northern Triangle allies have reached a HISTORIC agreement to confront the root causes of the crisis on our border,” Ms. Nielsen said on Twitter on Wednesday. “Working with Central American govts to increase security & prosperity in the region has been one of my greatest priorities.”The countries agreed to continue having conversations about ways to counter human trafficking, smuggling, organized crime and gangs, and to improve border security throughout the region.Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, said on Thursday that his country was in constant communication with the United States and would maintain “a very respectful relationship” with its neighbor.It was not immediately clear what caused Mr. Trump’s outrage early Thursday, and later he wrote that “Mexico, with the strongest immigration laws in the World, refuses to help with illegal immigration & drugs!” The remarks came on the heels of House Democrats’ refusal to sign off on a Defense Department request to redirect funds to be used to help build the president’s border wall.“Instead of focusing on readiness, hurricane recovery and other genuine issues, the administration continues to spend billions of dollars on an imaginary crisis,” Representative Adam Smith of Washington, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said in a statement on Tuesday.The Trump administration has long described the situation at the border as a national security emergency, but Democrats have disputed that characterization.The acting defense secretary, Patrick M. Shanahan, said on Wednesday that despite the objection from lawmakers, the Pentagon would move forward with the plan to reprogram funds to be used for the border wall.In February, Mr. Trump declared a national emergency on the southern border, providing for military funds to be shifted to help build the wall. The decision provoked outrage from Democratic and Republican lawmakers over the constitutional separation of powers. The president vetoed a resolution to block his declaration, and on Tuesday the House failed to overturn that veto.Defense Department officials have said they do not need congressional approval to divert funds and use them for the wall.Kirk Semple contributed reporting from Mexico City.Advertisement