https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/17/dining/cast-iron-skillet-seasoning-cleaning.html
How to Take Care of a Cast-Iron Pan - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
401
AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam SiftonThis article is part of a series aimed at helping you navigate life’s opportunities and challenges. What else should we write about? Contact us: smarterliving@nytimes.com.Maybe your parents gave you theirs, or you got one from a yard sale, or you bought one online for less than you’d spend buying a round of drinks at karaoke. Maybe you moved into an apartment and found one in the oven, left by a previous tenant. (It happens.) Or perhaps you’re just thinking of getting one because everyone says they’re so great for cooking so many things.Except: It’s a cast-iron pan. And there are a lot of rules about cast-iron pans. Like, you have to take care of them.The work seems daunting. Maybe you’ll just leave the thing in a cabinet and keep cooking with the cheap little pan you got at the big-box store, with its hot spots and the wobble it has on the stovetop because it warps in the heat.Don’t! A cast-iron pan is a new cook’s best friend. You can use it to cook almost anything. It is heavy and holds heat well, making it ideal for both frying and simmering. You can even use it as a roasting pan in the oven. And like a great friend, it takes very little work to keep it happy.(Related: Recipes to cook with a cast-iron pan)Cast-iron pans come in four varieties: new, old, sticky and rusty. If the one you have is new, it is almost assuredly “pre-seasoned,” which means it has a kind of glassine black finish to its interior and you can start using it right away. Cook bacon in it, chicken thighs, steak — anything that will give off a lot of fat and help you build up the patina on the surface of the metal.That patina is the other great thing about a cast-iron pan. It’s not just a sturdy cooking vessel. The finish is almost a nonstick one as well.Each time you finish cooking , wash the pan out promptly with hot water, scraping at any stuck bits with a spoon and getting the rest with paper towel. You may need to repeat the process a few times after your first few uses , but not as many times as you will if you succumb to the calls of noncooks to clean the thing out with soap, which will destroy the finish.Hot water. Paper towel. This is not complicated.For an old pan, the sort you get from a grandparent or junk store, start with the hot-water rinse-and-dry, then proceed directly to cooking bacon or burgers. (Don’t cook tomatoes or citrus until you have a pan that is extremely well seasoned. The acidity will lead to food that tastes metallic.) Clean as directed for a new pan, dry with paper towel, and use the pan again tomorrow and the day after that. Use makes a cast-iron pan better, every time.Is your cast-iron pan sticky? That’s kind of gross. But it’s just an excess of oil on the surface grabbing at dust and more oil and combining them into a kind of rudimentary fur that you’ll want to get rid of before using the pan. To clean it off, apply the hot-water technique you’d use for a nonsticky cast-iron pan, augmenting the cleaning with a metal scouring pad and, in really, really sticky situations, with a little dish soap.The soap will do its work, and leave you with a nonsticky pan. Of course, it won’t have a patina on it, either, and you’ll need to build that back up.Don’t worry. This, too, is easy work. Pour a few glugs of a neutral-flavored cooking oil like canola or grapeseed into the pan, and then place it on the stove over medium heat until the oil is shimmery and about to smoke. Turn off the heat, and let the pan sit for a few minutes, then discard the oil in it. Wipe out the pan with paper towel, leaving it shiny and black. You know the drill from there: Cook something fatty in the pan as soon as you can, then rinse the pan out and dry it well. Repeat.A rusty pan may take some work. Start with hot water and the same metal scouring pad you use on a sticky pan, and upgrade to a wire brush if you need to. The process may take some time. But in the end you’ll end up with raw metal, and you can proceed from there with the oil and the heating and the wiping-out and the cooking and the repeating.And soon your cast-iron pan will be black and slick and nonstick. And you’ll be able to tell anyone who asks how bad it was when you got it, and how awesome it is today.Want more? You might also like:• How to master basic knife skills• 20 dishes Sam Sifton thinks you should cook this fall• How to make cocktailsAdvertisement