https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/03/smarter-living/good-10-foot-charging-cables-tech.html
Why Everyone Needs a Good 10-Foot Charging Cable - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1532
AdvertisementSupported byBy Ann-Marie AlcántaraPicture it: You, lying across the couch, snuggled underneath a blanket with your phone, scrolling through social media or texting your friends. You roll over only to feel that tug — you know the one — that reminds you just how short your charging cable really is.There are too many tweets to see and Instagram posts to like to be limited by a short charging cable. So, in collaboration with Wirecutter, the New York Times company that reviews products, we’ve picked out the best 10-foot charging cable.It’s tempting to pick up whatever you find at a store that’s cheapest, but you’re going to need a cable that lasts a long time for the amount of wear and tear it gets. Sure, you might not trip on the charging cable every time you get up but it happens — and it’s worth investing in a product that’s up to the task.“Almost every device we use on a daily basis needs a cable to charge, so investing in a cable that’ll last is a good idea,” said Nick Guy, a senior staff writer at Wirecutter. “We’ve found that you don’t have to go overboard and spend too much money though.”Another reason to buy one? Your friends and anyone who comes into your home will thank you (seriously)! No one will need to crouch in a corner or sit on the floor while waiting for their phone to charge with the shortest cable alive (we’re looking at you standard charging cables). It’s a big people-pleaser and life-enhancer, and for whatever reason, relays to your friends that you’re somewhat of a capable adult who buys long-lasting and durable tech products (at least that’s what I tell myself).Time and time again, Mr. Guy finds that Anker makes winning charging cables. His reasoning for choosing Anker is clear: The company makes solid, lasting products that work well — both inside and out. (Wirecutter even had an electrical engineer tear apart lightning and micro-USB cables to make sure they were up to par.) While we stand by the recommendation, we’ll also include other products that Wirecutter called out as the best to choose from.If you’re looking for a micro-USB 10-foot cable, feast your eyes on the Anker PowerLine (also available in a six-foot model). It’s relatively cheap (retailing for about $7 from Amazon at the time of writing) and like all Anker products, it comes with a 18-month warranty. The cable also charges and transfers data incredibly fast, has a “hard-plastic casing holding the plug,” and is built to withstand “more than 10,000 bends.”For an iPhone-friendly option, Wirecutter recommends the Anker PowerLine Lightning cable, available for $12 on Amazon. It’s extremely similar to the micro-USB model, except it can handle only about 5,000 bends and doesn’t charge the iPad Pro as quickly. If you need something that can connect to USB-C products, like the MacBook, the six-foot USB-C to Lightning from Apple is a good fit and retails for $25.Anyone who needs a USB-A to USB-C cable, like owners of newer phones that run Google’s Android operating system, can find a solid, reliable option in Wirecutter’s favorites: The Anker PowerLine USB-C to USB 3.0 cable, available for around $12 on Amazon in a 10-foot model. It also comes in three- and six-foot lengths. Alternatively, you can opt for Google’s USB-A to USB-C cable available for $20, which is thinner and designed to withstand breaking apart.The prices for these cables are budget-friendly and worth it, if you’re looking for something based on utility and not looks.“Anker’s standard PowerLine cables are more or less identical on the inside to its more expensive premium cables,” said Mr. Guy. “Those are only worth it if you want a nylon-braided exterior or lifetime warranty.”Do yourself a favor and don’t opt for a more super-expensive or fancy branded cable. It won’t be worth it when it eventually falls apart. Walk the line between budget-friendly and durability, and you’ll be just fine.Ann-Marie Alcántara is a tech journalist who covers e-commerce and consumer tech. You can find her work here or follow her on Twitter: @itstheannmarieAdvertisement