https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/arts/dance/nyc-this-weekend-dance.html
5 Dance Performances to See in N.Y.C. This Weekend - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
472
AdvertisementSupported byBy Gia KourlasOur guide to dance performances happening this weekend and in the week ahead.ABT STUDIO COMPANY at the Joyce Theater (April 24, 7:30 p.m.; April 25, 8 p.m.; through April 27). This group, directed by the former American Ballet Theater soloist Sascha Radetsky, acts as a bridge between ballet training and a professional career. Proof of its success is evident in the main company: Three-quarters of its dancers started out at ABT Studio. For its Joyce season, the group presents existing and new choreography with repertoire that includes George Balanchine’s “Tarantella” and excerpts from “Don Quixote” and Stanton Welch’s “Clear,” as well as five New York premieres. Doing the choreographic honors are Stefanie Batten Bland, Gemma Bond, Ma Cong, Claudia Schreier and Ethan Stiefel. 212-242-0800, joyce.orgCOLLECTIVE TERRAIN/S at Danspace Project (April 25, 8 p.m.; through May 4). Jasmine Hearn, Tendayi Kuumba, Samita Sinha and Tatyana Tenenbaum take over Danspace Project with two weeks of events exploring the relationship between the voice and the body. Organized by Hearn and Tenenbaum along with Danspace’s associate curator, Lydia Bell, the engagement features performances, a workshop and a launch party for a book created by the collective and published by Danspace Project. For the choreographers, who will each present works during this run, the coming together of ideas, vocalization and dancing is based on their shared interest in “vibration as anatomy of human connection,” as they explain in press materials.866-811-4111, danspaceproject.orgJONATHAN GONZÁLEZ at MoMA PS1 (April 19-20, noon-6 p.m.; April 21, 3-6 p.m.). In “Lucifer Landing I,” the first in a series of works, González collaborates with the designers Rena Anakwe and Pamela Liou to explore ideas around blackness and post-anthropocentrism. He creates an immersive environment in the museum’s VW Dome — part of VW Sunday Sessions — as a model for sustainable living. Viewers are allowed into the dome one at a time. As González sees it, a solitary experience within the space is a choreographic action. A culminating performance on Sunday at 5 p.m. will cap off this project, and beginning on May 2, González heads to Abrons Arts Center in Manhattan to present “Lucifer Landing II.” 718-784-2086, momaps1.orgNEW YORK CITY BALLET at the David H. Koch Theater (April 23-25, 7:30 p.m.; through June 2). The spring season opens with a week of dances by current choreographers, and while some are unavoidably tedious — Mauro Bigonzetti’s “Oltremare” comes to mind — there are some treasures. As for the good? Justin Peck’s “Rodeo: Four Dance Episodes,” set to Aaron Copland’s timeless score, and William Forsythe’s playful and exacting “Herman Schmerman.” And as for the great? Alexei Ratmansky never phones anything in at City Ballet, so it’s time to bask in a delightful pair: “Pictures at an Exhibition” and “Concerto DSCH.” 212-496-0600, nycballet.comZVIDANCE at Joe’s Pub (April 25, 7 p.m.; through April 27). Dance Now presents Zvi Gotheiner’s choreographic rendition of “On the Road,” inspired by the Jack Kerouac novel that mythologized the Beat Generation. Gotheiner took his task seriously: As part of his research, he, along with four of his dancers and the media artist Joshua Higgason, embarked on a two-week trip retracing Kerouac’s route across the United States. Originally performed in New York at the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Next Wave Festival in 2016, the work has been reimagined for the tiny stage at Joe’s Pub. 212-967-7555, joespub.comAdvertisement