https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/04/business/media/medium-job-layoffs.html
Medium Lays Off a Third of Its Staff in Pursuit of Its Vision - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1447
AdvertisementSupported byBy Liam StackThe digital publishing company Medium on Wednesday laid off 50 employees — a third of its staff — as part of a larger redefinition of its business model, its founder announced in a blog post.The founder, Evan Williams, said the San Francisco-based company wanted to turn away from the ad-driven business model used by most online media companies and turn itself into what he called “a transformational product for curious humans.”The move came despite a year of substantial growth in Medium’s readership. Mr. Williams did not address the company’s financial situation in his announcement, but he said there was “a business case” for it to continue using its current business model. The changes are being made in pursuit of what he called the company’s vision.Mr. Williams said the company, which provides a blogging platform for writers and for publications like the liberal news site ThinkProgress, had not decided what its new business model would look like. He said only that it would allow “writers and creators to be rewarded based on the value they’re creating for people.”An email sent to the company on Wednesday was not immediately returned. An email sent to Mr. Williams was also not immediately returned.The layoffs came primarily from the site’s sales and support teams, as well as from the closure of the company’s offices in New York and Washington. The moves are necessary, Mr. Williams said, to keep the company from “becoming an extension of a broken system.”“Upon further reflection, it’s clear that the broken system is ad-driven media on the internet,” he said. “It simply doesn’t serve people. In fact, it’s not designed to.”“The vast majority of articles, videos, and other ‘content’ we all consume on a daily basis is paid for — directly or indirectly — by corporations who are funding it in order to advance their goals,” Mr. Williams added. “And it is measured, amplified, and rewarded based on its ability to do that.”Medium has grown considerably since it was introduced in 2012 by Mr. Williams, a founder of Twitter.In his note, he said that the site’s readership and the number of posts it published had each grown by 300 percent in 2016 and that it had told “important stories” written by a range of people “from world-famous leaders to unknown individuals.”Much of that growth came from commercial publishers, which Medium invested heavily in wooing to the platform.Mr. Williams said in his note that the sales and support teams had been expanded in 2016 as part of the effort to attract commercial publishers and provide them with revenue streams. But he said those teams had made only “incremental improvements on the ad-driven publishing model” instead of achieving “the transformative model we were aiming for.”Advertisement