https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/26/us/rachel-mitchell-bio-facts.html
What We Know About Rachel Mitchell, the Prosecutor Who Questioned Christine Blasey Ford - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
826
AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt StevensRachel Mitchell, an Arizona prosecutor specializing in sex crimes, questioned Christine Blasey Ford, Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh’s first accuser, on Thursday on behalf of the Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee.[Read our live updates on the hearing]The move allowed the 11 Republicans on the committee — all white men — to avoid the image on national television of them grilling Dr. Blasey in a hearing about the sexual assault she has accused Judge Kavanaugh of carrying out in high school. Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, referred to Ms. Mitchell as a “female assistant,” a description criticized by some as sexist and disrespectful to women.Dr. Blasey had sought to have the senators question her instead of a lawyer.In announcing the selection of Ms. Mitchell, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Senator Charles E. Grassley, called her a “career prosecutor with decades of experience prosecuting sex crimes.”“I’m very appreciative that Rachel Mitchell has stepped forward to serve in this important and serious role,” Mr. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said. “Ms. Mitchell has been recognized in the legal community for her experience and objectivity.”[Struggling to keep track of the Kavanaugh news? Catch up with our guide]Ms. Mitchell has been a prosecutor since 1993, according to Mr. Grassley’s statement.She works in the Maricopa County attorney’s office in Arizona, one of the most populous counties in the country and whose seat is Phoenix. Ms. Mitchell has overseen and assisted in prosecuting some high-profile sexual assault cases in Arizona, including ones against a church camp counselor, a police officer and clergymen.The Special Victims Division of the Maricopa County attorney’s office has two bureaus: one for sex crimes, and one for family violence. Ms. Mitchell spent 12 years running the sex-crimes bureau, which is responsible for prosecuting felonies like child molestation and adult sexual assault, Mr. Grassley’s statement said.Now, she is chief of the Special Victims Division, putting her in charge of both bureaus. She also carries the title of deputy county attorney. The statement says she is on leave from both positions.In her position in Maricopa County, she has advocated strengthening sex assault laws in the state and has pushed for changes in the courtroom to comfort victims testifying in abuse cases. In 2016, the Special Victims Division had a golden retriever mix named Sam who would stay next to children as they testified about traumatic episodes.In 2014, the Maricopa County Commission on Trial Court Appointments recommended Ms. Mitchell to be one of several candidates for Maricopa County Superior Court judge, The Arizona Republic reported.Mr. Grassley’s statement called Ms. Mitchell a “widely recognized expert on the investigation and prosecution of sex crimes,” who has frequently spoken on the subject and has instructed detectives, prosecutors and others on the best practices for interviewing victims of sex crimes.She has won several awards. In 2006, she was named prosecutor of the year by her office; three years before that, she was recognized by Janet Napolitano, then the governor, and Terry Goddard, then the state attorney general, as the “Outstanding Arizona Sexual Assault Prosecutor of the Year.”“She’s one of these career prosecutors who specializes in sex crimes,” Paul Ahler, who worked at the county attorney’s office years ago, told The Arizona Republic. “It’s hard to find those people because a lot of people get burned out on those issues, but it’s kind of been her life mission.”Ms. Mitchell spoke about how she became involved in sex abuse cases in a 2012 interview with FrontLine Magazine, the journal of Foundations Baptist Fellowship International, a fundamentalist group that cautioned in a blog post this week that some women fabricate allegations of sexual assault. In the interview, Ms. Mitchell said she first became familiar with issues around child sex crimes when she was paired up with a senior attorney who was working a case involving a youth choir director accused of misconduct.“It was different than anything that I would have ever imagined it being,” she said. “It intrigued me, and I continued to do other work with that bureau chief. It struck me how innocent and vulnerable the victims of these cases really were.”In the interview, Ms. Mitchell was questioned primarily about sex crimes by adults against children, and specifically molestation in churches.But speaking generally, she said that the “largest misconception is that ‘stranger danger’ is the rule rather than the fairly rare exception.”About 90 to 95 percent of victims, she said, “know the person who is offending against them.”She also listed a second misconception: “People think that children would tell right away and that they would tell everything that happened to them. In reality children often keep this secret for years, sometimes into their adulthood, sometimes forever.”Andrew R. Chow and Matthew Haag contributed reporting.Advertisement