https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/27/dining/rose-wine-provence-chateau-sainte-anne.html
Rosé Wine From Provence Deserves to Live a Little - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1940
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovÉVENOS, France — On a visit to Château Ste.-Anne, a venerable family producer of naturally made Bandols near this old hilltop village, I was doing what comes so naturally in Provence: drinking a glass of rosé and eating a square of pissaladière, the pizzalike flatbread whose primary toppings — onions, olives and anchovies — are as essential to the Provençal landscape as pastel skies and sun-drenched seas. The pairing was magnificent, for this rosé, a 2014 Bandol, was serious, fresh yet substantial, with anise and chalky mineral flavors that enhanced each bite of the pissaladière.“It’s a wine to have with food,” said Raphaël Étienne, who manages the estate with Jean-Baptiste Dutheil and his mother, Françoise Dutheil (and who, incidentally, baked the pissaladière). “It’s too young now. You really need to hold it for one or two more years, minimum.” For the great mass of consumers who each summer demand the newest vintage of rosé, such advice borders on sacrilege. The world knows rosé as an ephemeral wine, easy and simple, to be consumed thoughtlessly and uncritically by the side of the pool, at picnics — anywhere, really, as long as it’s summer. As autumn approaches, desperation rises among wine shop managers with unsold bottles. Sell a rosé in the fall? Impossible. Age it for a year? How droll. The vast majority of rosés are, in fact, like street-corner flowers. They’re superficially, sometimes cynically pretty, yet made to wither quickly. But for people who love wine and want better, rosé doesn’t have to be a fleeting fancy. Here in Provence, source of many insipid rosés, a parallel nerve center of beautiful rosés exists, produced with passion and commitment. These wines have all the joy and vivacity anyone could want in a rosé, yet are substantial as well, with the capacity to stand up to food, to age and to evolve. Many, like Château Ste.-Anne, are from Bandol, which produces the most serious, age-worthy reds in Provence, based primarily on the mourvèdre grape. These reds can be fierce, almost savage in their tannic intensity when young. But as they evolve, often for decades, they grow complex with flavors of licorice, dark fruit, tobacco and a stony minerality. The Bandol rosés, too, are based on mourvèdre, with subsidiary red grapes like grenache, cinsault and carignan. But because they are generally made like white wines (the juice of the grapes is whisked off the tannin-and-pigment-laden skins after a short maceration to gain a touch of color), they are ready to drink far earlier. Nonetheless, they are imprinted with the identity of mourvèdre, with flavors suggesting licorice, flowers and the deeply ingrained minerality that seems to come from the complex limestone and clay soils. And they can age beautifully, in unusual, intriguing ways. A 2001 rosé from Ste.-Anne developed a spicy quality, with notes of oranges and mandarins, that was delightful and perfectly refreshing. A 2014 Bandol rosé from Domaine de Terrebrune in the nearby town of Ollioules is alive and almost explosive in the glass, dry and savory. With a few more years of age, a 2007 Terrebrune rosé is rounder and creamier. Domaine Tempier in Le Plan du Castellet, perhaps the best-known Bandol estate, is famous for its rosés, and they are delicious young. The 2014 is chalky, floral and decidedly savory, yet a bit disjointed, too young. By contrast, the 2013 Tempier rosé has settled down, tasting of flowers, licorice and minerals.For comparison, Daniel Ravier, who manages Tempier for the Peyraud family, grabbed some older bottles of rosé from the cellar. A 1999 was long and elegant, complex and austere, with flavors of licorice, citrus and minerals. A 1988 was rich and still bright, superb and complex, with a lip-smacking verve. A 27-year-old rosé? It’s a novelty, though a delicious one, and it makes the point that good rosés can have far more substance than imagined. Not all serious rosés come from Bandol. From Palette, a tiny appellation near Aix-en-Provence, Château Simone makes complex, age-worthy wines of all colors. These include a long, deep, pure and lovely rosé that Jean-François Rougier, Simone’s proprietor, says is best at five or six years of age. It’s darker than most Bandol rosés, a vibrant, translucent ruby rather than the typical Bandol onionskin.“Rosé wines have saved Provence, so I would never say a bad word about them,” Mr. Rougier said, though he was unable to contain himself, adding, “Rosé in Provence is often rubbish, but we’ve never thought of them that way.”Domaine Hauvette makes excellent rosés from Les Baux de Provence, as do Château de Roquefort and Commanderie de Peyrassol in Côtes de Provence. In Cassis, a small fishing village just east of Marseille, the rosés are lighter-bodied and don’t age as long, but they are singular. Domaine du Bagnol’s 2014 Cassis rosé is light, pleasant and exceedingly mineral. At Clos Ste. Magdeleine, where the vineyards, like many in Bandol, are within sight of both craggy mountains and the Mediterranean, the 2014 Cassis rosé is fresh, delicious and almost salty. “It’s the salinity from the ocean and the wind from the mountain,” said Jonathan Sack-Zafiropulo, who took over winemaking duties from his father, François Sack, several years ago. “It’s rosé from Cassis, very specific, not just rosé from Provence.”Indeed, serious rosés can come from all over the globe. There’s the Viña Tondonia rosado of the great Rioja producer López de Heredia, and the wonderful Cerasuolo d’Abruzzo of Valentini. I love the rosés of the Irouléguy producer Domaine Ilarria. The rosés of Tavel are legendarily long-aging, and no doubt many others deserve to be mentioned. Yet perhaps no region has as many good age-worthy rosés as Bandol, which makes it particularly frustrating to producers who take their wines seriously, but know they will be opened only when young.“Everybody wants the new vintage, but I have a big problem with that,” said Étienne Portalis of Château Pradeaux in St.-Cyr-sur-Mer, a wonderful old-school Bandol producer. “We know our rosé is better after one year in the bottle.” Mr. Ravier of Tempier agreed. “The ’14 will be more interesting at the end of the summer, but by then it will be all gone,” he said. “We could hold it for a year, and that would be ideal, but a suicidal marketing decision.”At Château de Pibarnon in La Cadière-d’Azur, whose chalky licorice-flavored 2014 Bandol rosé is already in American stores, the proprietor, Eric de Saint Victor, is planning a special rosé cuvée made entirely of mourvèdre. With mischievous pleasure, he says he will not introduce it until the summer is over, when the market for rosé dies. It’s rich, deep and almost saline, yet not at all heavy. He says he is reacting to what amounts almost to a race to get rosés to the market. “Some producers don’t even wait for the summer,” he said. “They’re selling new rosés in December for the ski resorts and the Caribbean.”The hurry to get rosés to market inevitably results in compromised winemaking. The more cynical simply use technology to fabricate the aromas, flavors and even the color of their wines. Producers with more integrity simply have to work harder. “Rosé’s the easiest wine to make,” Mr. Ravier said, “but the hardest wine to make well.”Most rosés today are made with the expectation that they will be consumed young. They are often harvested earlier than reds or whites, fermented at cold temperatures and aged briefly in steel tanks to preserve fruity aromas, and given a dose of carbon dioxide to add an short-lived sense of energy and zest. After a few months, the carbon dioxide dissipates and the wine falls flat. Even some of the best rosés from Bandol are made with an eye on the market. Most of the older rosés from the 1980s that I’ve tasted and enjoyed were aged in large old barrels rather than the steel tanks often used today. They were fermented with the ambient yeast rather than commercial yeast and went through malolactic fermentation, in which firm malic acid is converted to softer lactic acid. Today, that process is often blocked with a dose of sulfur, partly, winemakers say, because of commercial imperatives.With ambient yeast, full fermentation and the full malolactic process can sometimes take months, delaying bottling of the wine. Commercial yeast, which can work at the colder fermentation temperatures often used to preserve immediate aromas, works faster.“We need to finish fermentation in time to release for the summer,” Mr. Ravier said. “I’ve always been for achieving full malo, but with global warming and hot vintages like ’07 and ’09, we now block part of malo to keep freshness and acidity.”Perhaps alone among the top Bandol producers, Ste.-Anne continues to make its rosé the old-fashioned way, using ambient yeast and allowing the fermentation and malolactic processes to work at their own pace. Its rosés won’t arrive on American shelves until June or later, well after other rosés are on the market. I can’t say the Ste.-Anne rosé is better than the other Bandol rosés I’ve enjoyed, but I would like to taste it alongside the other 2014s in about 15 years. Just for fun, Mr. Étienne of Ste.-Anne poured another old rosé, a 1989. It was light yet beautifully concentrated, with lingering flavors of oranges and stones.“That’s wine made naturally,” he said. “Even the French don’t understand wines like these.” Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov. Advertisement