https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/02/arts/television/game-of-thrones-jon-snow-review.html
‘Game of Thrones’ Season 6, Episode 2: Jon Snow, Dragons and Ramsay’s Dogs - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1707
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jeremy EgnerSpoilers for Sunday’s episode of “Game of Thrones” are below. Naturally.It turns out the Red Woman isn’t so feeble after all.A week after revealing herself to be perhaps centuries old as part of an extended pity party over her shattered visions (she thought), Melisandre put an end to the essentially nonmysterious mystery over whether Jon Snow would stay dead. He didn’t, jolting awake after some laying of hands, a few prayers and roughly 68,000 blog posts.At the moment, viewers are nearly alone in this knowledge — all of the direct witnesses, except Ghost, left before Jon had his awakening. This includes the Red Woman, who apparently read none of those blog posts, most of which surmised that the story placed her at Castle Black essentially to bring back Snow. She had to be talked into even trying by Ser Davos, the most valuable player of the first fifth of Season 6.[Ahead of the final season of “Game of Thrones,” relive it all with our ultimate watching guide, including episode recaps and deep plot dives.]In the end, it was a mostly perfunctory resolution to a twist that surprised, I’m guessing, few viewers. Jon Snow’s assassination was astonishing immediately when it happened but, upon further consideration, seemed destined to be overturned on magical appeal. There were too many questions (his parentage) and teased confrontations (the White Walkers) that would be left unresolved, and the show’s entire Wall story line would be left with a bastard-sized hole in the middle.The twist was perhaps most compelling as an offscreen object lesson about how drastically viewers’ relationships with beloved television shows have changed, to the point that any show runners considering old tricks like big, shocking deaths and cliffhangers might want to think twice. (Certainly, after Jon Snow and the Glenn thing on “The Walking Dead,” the is-he-or-isn’t-he-dead concept seems done.)If David Benioff and D.B. Weiss, the show’s creators, had to do it over again, I wonder if they would have handled the whole arc over a few weeks in the same season, giving obsessives less time to pick apart the move and go N.S.A. on the movements and haircuts of Kit Harington, the actor who plays Jon Snow. Of course, overheated publicity isn’t exactly terrible for a TV show.The good news is, that in dispensing relatively quickly with a question many viewers didn’t see as much of a question at all — is Jon Snow coming back? — the resurrection raises more of them that are arguably more interesting and certainly less cut and dried. For one, what sort of Jon Snow will he be now? Will he be another Beric Dondarrion, who gets killed and returns seemingly whenever convenient? (Seven times at last count.) Seems doubtful, though such a skill could come in handy against a zombie army. (If nothing else, perhaps Jon’s newly undead status will give him additional insight into his opponent.)Will he be somehow diminished, a shell of the old Jon Snow? Dondarrion mentioned in Season 3 that with each resurrection, he is less of himself. But would that even be a bad thing in Jon’s case? The guy could stand to tone down the emo quotient a bit, though I’d expect a stint in the afterlife to have the opposite effect.More important: Will Snow’s return be what finally unites the Night’s Watch and Wildlings, now together at Castle Black after a (wisely) aborted confrontation? If not, what would? If the show wants to take the Christ parallels even farther, it will have Snow forgive his betrayers and strive to bring everyone together as one family against the forces of negation and darkness. They’ll have a pretty good warm-up coming if Ramsay Bolton does lead an attack on Castle Black as mentioned. (Would there be a more satisfying end for Ramsay than for Wun Wun to get ahold of him as he did that feckless archer?)But we’re getting ahead of ourselves. Let’s allow him to get some electrolytes, maybe pet his wolf, and then we can start figuring out how he’s going to save the world.Though Snow’s was the only literal rebirth on Sunday, he was one of several characters who took significant evolutionary steps toward the people they are ultimately meant to be, for better and worse.For Melisandre, who had been spiraling and admitted to Davos that she was something of a fraud, this display of true supernatural ability would seem to establish her bona fides. But to what end? Is she now linked to Snow for more noble purposes? (He would need her around as his designated reviver, à la Thoros of Myr, if he planned on dying again.) Or will it send her, power-mad, in even darker directions? After all, this is a woman who was burning children roughly a few weeks ago (in “Thrones” time).Bran Stark came back for the first time since Season 4, appearing mostly in a vision that, thanks to his developing power, took him and the Three-Eyed Raven, Scrooge-like, to a cheerful Winterfell past. Bran witnessed his father and uncle, as boys, sparring, and viewers got the first living look at Lyanna Stark. The girl, Ned’s sister, died before the “Game of Thrones” timeline but will likely have a significant role. We also got the suggestion that Bran’s visions are intoxicating to him, which could be an issue going forward.Hodor, at the same time, was reborn in our eyes: His real name is Wyllis! And he used to say more things! I may be more excited about the Hodor origin story than I am about the race for the Iron Throne. (Though the “stable boy” part offers a possible hint, I guess.)Somewhere south of Bran and his magical tree, Theon appears ready to return to the Iron Islands, come what may. Over in Braavos, Arya was finally enough of a nameless girl to get to go back inside, after a few more whacks.And then there’s Ramsay, who attained new levels of treachery, killing first his father, then his stepmother and infant half-brother. The first move accomplished what had to be Ramsay’s plan all along — making him Lord Bolton, though the timeline was perhaps accelerated by the new heir. The second was the latest, almost unbelievably cruel moment in a show that’s had plenty of them. (I say “almost” because, well, they keep coming.) He did it by letting loose his dogs, who were clearly unsated by the Myranda Value Meal they had last week.Look, Ramsay’s gonna Ramsay, though I could have done without the mauling sound effects. (Deliver us from this long nightmare, Wun Wun.) It’s unclear if those were the same hounds who, as many commenters noted, mysteriously went missing during Brienne’s rescue of Sansa and Theon last week. (They didn’t look like them.)I am sorry to see the end of Roose, a sort of down-market Tywin Lannister but with similar diction and parenting skills. (Ramsay was going to get him at some point but Roose certainly exacerbated things with his regular verbal jabs.) I’m less so about the other bad dad who bought it on Sunday, Balon Greyjoy, mostly because we hardly knew him and what we did know wasn’t pleasant.The demise of Balon, Theon’s father and the king of the Ironborn, came via a new character: his brother Euron, who I’m guessing will be returning soon to claim the throne. Yara thinks she deserves it, however. I’m not going to get too worked up about this subplot until I see where it’s headed, but let’s hope that the Iron Islands aren’t this year’s Dorne.In another win for Melisandre, you’ll recall that Balon was the last remaining living leech king from her Season 3 liaison with Gendry. (The other two were Robb Stark and Joffrey Baratheon.) So a big week for her!Gendry, of course, is still rowing — in our hearts, if nothing else.• Tyrion took his first baby steps toward dragon husbandry, unchaining the two beasts Dany put in the cellar at the end of Season 4. The move was effective, if unnerving — “The next time I have an idea like that, punch me in the face,” Tyrion told Varys. The masterful Peter Dinklage proved that he can bring it even opposite a random guy in a greensuit, or whatever fills in for the dragons before C.G.I. is involved.• Speaking of bad drunken ideas, you absolutely do not want to be besmirching Cersei’s honor in King’s Landing these days. Do we think Jaime, Mountainstein and the King’s Guard would be enough to overthrow the Sparrows?• So what say you? Were you satisfied by Snow’s return? Can Cersei mold Tommen into something more than a cream puff? What else would you like to see Wun Wun smash? Please fire away in the comments.Advertisement