https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/29/dining/worlds-50-best-restaurants-defends-its-list.html
World’s 50 Best Restaurants Defends Its List - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2020
AdvertisementSupported byBy Julia MoskinA slow-burning squabble in the culinary world heated up on Friday, when the website for Occupy 50 Best, a movement started this month to protest favoritism, opacity and sexism in an influential annual list of the World’s 50 Best Restaurants, was briefly shut down at the request of the 50 Best organization.Earlier in the day, a lawyer for the 50 Best, which is based in Britain, sent the protesting group an email demanding that it stop using the copyrighted logos of 50 Best, which the opposition group had incorporated into its own logo. The email also said that the site’s Internet server in France, OVH, had been notified that Occupy 50 Best was using the 50 Best logo without permission.OVH took down the site, but restored it about an hour later, after Occupy 50 Best changed the logos and took to Facebook and Twitter, asserting that its rights to free speech were being violated.The 2015 list will be revealed on Monday, at a black-tie invitation-only ceremony at the Guildhall in London.Occupy 50 Best, which has not yet clearly defined its grievances, has received small attention in the international media. But it has been gaining traction in France, where influential chefs like Joël Robuchon, Thierry Marx and Georges Blanc have signed its online petition (even though Mr. Robuchon’s restaurants have often been on the list; one of his Paris restaurants was at No. 31 in 2014.)The petition calls upon the award’s sponsors, which include huge global brands like San Pellegrino and Cacao Barry, to abandon the awards until its voting system is changed to eliminate flaws that opponents see: conflicts of interest, male chauvinism and a lack of verification that judges have visited the restaurants they vote for. (This year, the list has retained the consulting firm Deloitte to clarify and verify certain procedures.)“We want them to professionalize themselves,” said Zoe Reyners, one of the opposition group’s three founders. “They have so much power, so much sponsorship money, they can and should use it responsibly.”The World’s 50 Best organization said no further action would be taken against Occupy 50 Best. “We respect their right to express their opinions, even though we obviously don’t agree with them,” William Drew, the head of World’s 50 Best, said in a statement. An article this month in the French GQ magazine has contributed to growing criticism of the list, which has become influential since it began in Britain’s Restaurant magazine in 2002. Arnaud Tillon, the brand director for Nestlé Waters, which owns San Pellegrino, was quoted as saying that the lack of transparency in the list’s methodology was a problem for the company in the French market.Votes are cast by nearly a thousand judges whose identities are theoretically concealed, but who are often well known to chefs and restaurateurs. In fact, a third of the voters are chefs and restaurateurs themselves. Another third are members of the food media. (The remaining third are “gastronomes” and food lovers, also known as restaurant regulars.)No trips or meals are paid for by the 50 Best organization, and there are no restrictions on how or whether voters pay for their meals, or for the travel it takes to get there. Many government tourism boards, like those of Sweden, Peru, Mexico and Singapore, have begun or increased their sponsorship of gastro-tourism for those in the food industry since the advent of the list.The Copenhagen restaurant Noma has topped the list many times, making its chef, Rene Redzepi, an international star.Mr. Drew says the voting system is well documented and as transparent as it can be while preserving the anonymity of the voters. “Of course not everyone is going to agree with this list, or any list,” he said. “My list of favorite restaurants is going to be different from yours. But we believe that the collective opinions of food experts around the world has value.”Advertisement