https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/07/arts/music/beyonce-releases-surprise-single-formation-ahead-of-super-bowl-performance.html
Beyoncé Releases Surprise Single ‘Formation’ Ahead of Super Bowl Performance - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1220
AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CoscarelliBeyoncé is not coming to the Super Bowl empty-handed. A day before her planned performance at Sunday’s game, the singer released a new single, “Formation,” along with a music video that invokes Hurricane Katrina and black pride (“I like my negro nose with Jackson 5 nostrils,” she sings.As has become Beyoncé’s habit, “Formation” was announced simultaneously on her Instagram account and official website with little warning. The song and video are also streaming on Tidal, the music service owned by the singer’s husband, Jay Z; the site is offering a free download of the track in exchange for an email address. The high-profile release follows an up-and-down week for Tidal after the service released Rihanna’s “Anti” early because of an online leak.“Formation,” written with Swae Lee of the rap duo Rae Sremmurd, is Beyoncé’s first major release since the surprise drop of her self-titled album in December 2013. On “Formation,” the singer addresses not only race, but rumors about her celebrity (“Y’all haters corny with that Illuminati mess,” she purrs, a reference to a popular conspiracy theory about a cult of rich and powerful public figures) The Louisiana-centric track also features spoken interludes from the New Orleans bounce artist Big Freedia and the late YouTube personality Messy Mya, who was murdered there in 2010.“Earned all this money but they never take the country out me,” Beyoncé half-raps over a minimal beat, produced by Mike WiLL Made-It and Apluss, which breaks into a blown-out marching band stomp. “I got hot sauce in my bag — swag.”The song’s video features a cameo by Beyoncé’s daughter with Jay Z, Blue Ivy. It was directed by Melina Matsoukas, who previously worked with the singer on the clip for “Pretty Hurts”; Ms. Matsoukas won a Grammy for directing Rihanna’s “We Found Love” video.The video’s release came with controversy. Not long after it was put online, the filmmakers Abteen Bagheri and Chris Black took to Twitter and claimed “Formation” used footage from “That B.E.A.T.,” their 2013 documentary about New Orleans bounce, without permission.“They stole it,” said Mr. Black, who produced “That B.E.A.T.,” which was commissioned by Nokia and Sundance. “We were there for a week and hung out with the people and immersed ourselves in the culture. We put a lot into it ourselves.”He said Beyoncé’s team had initially asked to license the footage, B-roll scenes of the New Orleans music scene, days before a Feb. 1 deadline for a decision Mr. Bagheri, the documentary’s director, said on Twitter that he was asked for approval as well, but had denied the request.In a statement, a representative for Beyoncé said the footage was licensed properly.“The documentary footage was used with permission and licensed from the owner of the footage,” Yvette Noel-Schure said. “They were given proper compensation. The footage was provided to us by the filmmaker’s production company. The filmmaker is listed in the credits for additional photography direction. We are thankful that they granted us permission.”Ms. Matsoukas also responded on Twitter, thanking Mr. Bagheri for “the beautiful NOLA footage,” which helped “to make #FORMATION whole.”In a rare interview ahead of her Super Bowl performance, Beyoncé spoke to CBS about her previous appearance on the Super Bowl stage in New Orleans in 2013. “I knew I had to make the best of the moment and I wanted it to be something iconic and something that people will never forget,” she said in the interview, which aired on Saturday.Bruno Mars has also confirmed in a post on his Instagram that he will be making an appearance during the halftime show.Advertisement