https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/25/arts/design/magnum-manifesto-a-70-year-history-lesson-in-photojournalism.html
‘Magnum Manifesto,’ a 70-Year History Lesson in Photojournalism - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2132
AdvertisementSupported byArt ReviewBy Jason FaragoWhen the International Center of Photography reopened last year in its new home on the Bowery, it seemed to be swerving into a new lane — or, perhaps, careering off the road altogether. New York’s leading photography institution, it opened uptown in 1974, with a mandate from its founder, Cornell Capa, to showcase photojournalism, documentary images and other kinds of “concerned photography.” But since then, the medium of photography has fractured; lens-based imagery has moved from the darkroom to the social media screen; and the center has changed, too. The new location includes no space for its permanent collection — those 200,000 prints are out in Jersey City — and its first show was a digital hodgepodge that drew as many snipes as cheers.So “Magnum Manifesto,” the museum’s rewarding summer exhibition, is something of a #TBT, to use that most nostalgic of Instagram hashtags. This 70-year showcase of Magnum Photos, the granddaddy of photojournalism agencies — whose founders included Capa’s brother Robert, who shot the much-debated image of a dying Republican soldier in the Spanish Civil War — turns back to printed images and published books, made by professionals shooting with high-end kits. The 75 photographers include such veterans as Henri Cartier-Bresson, Elliott Erwitt and Susan Meiselas; more recent stars like Martin Parr and Alec Soth; and promising younger members like the South African photographer Mikhael Subotzky. It adds up to a fine history lesson, but also offers a model for how this museum can pursue the necessary work of thinking about other, newer kinds of images.Magnum was founded in 1947 as a collective of independent photojournalists, ready to document the world with new, lightweight cameras, notably rough-and-tough Leicas loaded with high-speed 35-millimeter film. “Magnum Manifesto” thus opens with a wall of small black-and-white photographs attesting to a new postwar order: a war crimes trial in Dachau, the United Nations General Assembly in session, flag-waving rebels in Algiers, Perónists demonstrating en masse in Buenos Aires. In those first decades, the Magnum aesthetic was one of humanistic universalism, and photography offered a lingua franca to imagine a new world. Magnum’s images would appear in such magazines as Look, in the United States, or Point de Vue, in France.True to the agency’s name — a magnum is an oversize bottle of champagne, but also a cartridge of bullets — Magnum in its early days was a collective of brash individuals whose images sought to distill the chaos of life into precise, unforgettable instants. Cartier-Bresson, who had escaped from a German prison camp during the war, was a master at that; in a washed-out shot here from 1951, a lone woman crossing the street in London manages to convey the whole of the Blitz and postwar privation. Constantine Manos, a South Carolina photographer who deserves far more renown, shot a moving series of the daily life of an African-American child in 1952, when Mr. Manos was just a teenager himself.The hunger for what Cartier-Bresson called “the decisive moment” endured in the next generation of Magnum photographers, including Danny Lyon, whose pictures of inmates in a Texas jail still shock, and Raymond Depardon, who portrayed patients in an Italian psychiatric hospital. Yet the late ’60s also saw a more restless, troubled vernacular arise among Magnum’s members, especially the Americans. Paul Fusco, shooting in color, traveled in 1968 on the funeral train bearing Robert F. Kennedy’s coffin to Washington; the expectant mourners are a blurry, betrayed collective, with none of the specificity you’ll find in Cartier-Bresson or Robert Capa. Charles Harbutt, a photographer and former president of Magnum, rigged up a slot machine to three slide projectors for a 1969 exhibition in New York. Visitors pulled the arm and saw photographs from “America in Crisis” flicker past: If you hit three Nixons, you won a prize. (The reproduction at the center works quite nicely, though I never hit the jackpot.)Still, you’ve got to make a living. Magnum is a commercial agency, not an artistic collective, and one of the surprises of this exhibition is a wall of glossy corporate annual reports, for such companies as the Bank of New York and Goldman Sachs. The Seagram report of 1979, shot in luscious color by Burt Glinn, features a smiling couple enjoying cocktails in front of their Frank Stella painting, and three gents downing scotch and martinis outside the Toronto City Hall. Those projects helped pay the bills for other, more personal endeavors, including photobooks of the Iranian Revolution and other current affairs — evoked here through half a dozen short films, with hand models turning pages.Is there any function for reportage photography today, now that everyone carries a cameraphone, and every triumph or disaster is instantly captured and broadcast? A new generation of Magnum photographers is trying, and its members embrace a more artistic and individual language than that of their predecessors. Mr. Subotzky’s outstanding, voluminous project “Ponte City,” done in collaboration with the artist Patrick Waterhouse, explores the tallest residential tower in Johannesburg, which was built for white residents during apartheid and later became a high-rise slum and drug den. In addition to photographs of the tower’s residents and architecture, the project also includes more idiosyncratic images of flickering TVs and stained posters, assembled into more than a dozen pamphlets.Other members have taken similarly subjective stances. Paolo Pellegrin documents the continuing refugee crisis in the Mediterranean by picturing not bodies, but waves. Alessandra Sanguinetti has shot the Promenade des Anglais in Nice, France, after the terrorist attack of last summer, as a nearly abstract blackout.“Magnum Manifesto” has been organized by three French scholars: Clément Chéroux, who recently left the Pompidou Center in Paris to become the senior curator of photography at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; the historian and Magnum specialist Clara Bouveresse; and Pauline Vermare, an associate curator at the center. Its principal accomplishment, beyond the archival discoveries, is that it presents photography as neither independent art nor mere documentation, but as something in between, plugged into the world while still obeying its own rules. The game now for the center is to bring the same rigor displayed in this show to its presentations of other kinds of images: ISIS videos and Snapchat filters, drone sights and selfies.Magnum ManifestoThrough Sept. 3 at the International Center of Photography, Manhattan; 212-857-0000, icp.org.Advertisement