https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/opinion/mueller-report-redactions.html
Opinion | How Will History Judge Barr’s Redactions? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1874
AdvertisementSupported byConsidering his behavior in the shadow of Watergate, when someone erased a crucial stretch of audiotape to protect the president.By Caroline FredricksonMs. Fredrickson is the president of the American Constitution Society.Congress is on a two-week recess. Americans are on spring break, with worshipers gathering for Good Friday, Passover and Easter across the country. For an attorney general who has operated more as a flak and a flunky than an independent official concerned with justice, Thursday is the perfect day to dump a report, script a response and be sure that most Americans aren’t paying attention. And an unexpected distraction, the burning of Notre-Dame Cathedral, means most of the world won’t be focused on Washington either.Attorney General William Barr is counting on us to be satisfied that the report is not as heavily redacted as feared. And while a few members of Congress will get a less redacted version — absent grand jury material — the American public and the Congress have a right to know about Russian interference in our election, Russian contacts with the presidential campaign of Donald Trump and evidence of obstruction of justice by the president. In that light, even these redactions are too many.The “18-and-a-half-minute gap” — a stretch of audiotape from the White House that had been suspiciously erased — is a shameful reminder of how certain insiders serving in the Nixon administration worked to cover up the president’s crimes. While some Nixon aides are now venerated for refusing to carry out corrupt instructions during the Watergate inquiries, others bear the stain of helping the president hide misconduct.When history judges Attorney General William Barr, the verdict on his decision to withhold large portions of the final report by the special counsel Robert Mueller from Congress is likely to be severe. Of course, we don’t know what lies underneath these redactions, but we have reason to worry: Mr. Barr has shown little appetite for asserting independence from President Trump. Mr. Barr’s recent conduct brings to mind Mr. Nixon’s executive assistant and personal secretary, Rose Mary Woods, and her role in the Watergate inquiry.Reportedly an upstanding and dedicated aide to the president, Ms. Woods emerged in the public eye after Congress and the special prosecutor demanded White House recordings of presidential conversations relevant to the June 1972 burglary at the Democratic National Committee headquarters at the Watergate complex. When the White House had to reveal to the court that the tapes contained an 18-and-a-half-minute gap, the White House counsel said that Ms. Woods would provide an explanation.While technical analysts raised questions about whether Ms. Woods could have caused the gap, she detailed her account for the record, reportedly “combative at times” with the prosecutors, and remained on Mr. Nixon’s staff through his resignation. In the grand scheme of things, out of Mr. Nixon’s over 3,000 hours of recorded conversations, 18 and a half minutes doesn’t seem like a lot — but let’s remember that the smoking-gun tape itself was only eight minutes long. We need to know what he’s covering up.On the stand, Ms. Woods tried to take the fall for at least part of that gap. She claimed she had accidentally hit “record” instead of “stop” while reaching for the phone during a tape transcription session. Her re-enactment of this event, memorialized in a photo the White House released, became known as the “Rose Mary stretch.” While technical analysts raised questions about whether Ms. Woods could have caused the gap, she stuck to her account.When it comes to the Mueller inquiry into presidential misconduct, Mr. Barr has acted more like a loyal presidential aide than the leader of an agency charged with exercising independent judgment. He questioned Mr. Mueller’s investigation of the president for obstruction of justice early on in a 19-page legal memo he volunteered to the administration, even before taking the helm at the Department of Justice.And where he could have neutrally passed Mr. Mueller’s findings to Congress, he instead took the widely criticized and unusual step of making and announcing his own legal conclusions about Mr. Mueller’s obstruction inquiry. Then, instead of working with Congress and the courts to facilitate disclosure of the Mueller report to Congress, he set forth a redaction process that appears designed to deny Congress information to which it is legally entitled and that defies precedent.In short, Mr. Barr has a record of appearing to seek opportunities to sow disregard for the Mueller inquiry and reduce transparency with Congress and the public about its findings. His recent Senate testimony making unsupported insinuations that the United States government spied on the Trump campaign provided further evidence of this troubling reflex.A revealing report by Ryan Goodman, a law professor at New York University, about Mr. Barr’s past conduct with Congress is cause for additional concern. According to Mr. Goodman, Mr. Barr misled Congress about the contents of a document withheld from Congress in 1989, during his prior service as the head of the Office of Legal Counsel. When asked at the time to produce an O.L.C. opinion on the F.B.I. taking people into custody in foreign nations without the countries’ consent, he instead provided a summary that omitted key conclusions — conclusions that proved highly controversial when they were disclosed years later. Congress needs to review the unredacted Mueller report and its underlying evidence so that history does not repeat itself. Full disclosure is integral for Congress to protect national security and the rule of law, and to ensure that redactions do not reflect a “Bill Barr stretch” to protect the president.Caroline Fredrickson (@crfredrickson) is the president of the American Constitution Society and author of “Under the Bus: How Working Women Are Being Run Over” and the forthcoming “The Democracy Fix: How to Win the Fight for Fair Rules, Fair Courts and Fair Elections.”The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement