http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/24/dining/summer-wine-20-bottles-for-20-dollars.html
Summer Wine: 20 for $20 - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1981
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovHot-weather drinking requires its own genre of wines: light, easygoing, blithe and, above all, refreshing. These sorts of wines are enjoyable year-round, but in the sweaty summer months, the desirable becomes the imperative.It’s not a question of red or white or even pink. All are good as long as they come in the proper summer weight. Just as winter wools are stored away, so are enervating heavy wines that weigh you down, rather than pep you up.These summery wines are especially appealing when the price is equally untaxing. I’ve long asserted that the greatest values in wines are in the $15 to $25 range.Plenty of sound wines are available under $15, even under $10. The problem is, they often lack much interest.But if you raise the threshold to $15 to $25, the number of exciting wines increases exponentially. With these wines, grapes are more likely to be farmed with the utmost care, then painstakingly transformed into wine.I know some people will resist paying more than $15 for a wine, just as many shop for the least expensive ingredients regardless of quality. That’s a question of priorities with which I do not argue. For those who believe this will be money well spent, however, I offer 20 great summer-weight wines costing no more than $20.What is weight in a wine? Alcohol accounts for a lot of it. Once alcohol rises above 14 percent, it can make wine seem heavier in texture. It can leave the impression of sweetness. And certainly you can’t drink as much without potentially suffering consequences.Exceptions come to mind, like fino sherry, which is as bracing, fragile and refreshing as the lightest, most carefree wine, even though it’s 15 percent or more. But those exceptions are few and far between.I didn’t plan to focus on alcohol. But I realized it was the common thread among most of these wines. Only one, the Bodega Chacra merlot from Argentina, hits 14 percent. One other, the De Forville Dolcetto d’Alba, is 13.5 percent. Two others are 13.0 percent and all the others are 12.8 or under. Six are even under 12.0, which is no sweat for an outdoor lunch.Not all of these wines will be easy to find. Many are small production and are available only in one part of the country or another. But they’re all worth looking for, and no doubt you’ll make some summer-weight discoveries of your own.Château Tour Grise Saumur Brut Non Dosé 2004, 12.0 percent, $19The versatile chenin blanc grape lends itself beautifully to sparkling wine. Tour Grise is a husband-and-wife team that grows grapes biodynamically in limestone soils within the Saumur appellation in the Loire Valley. This 11-year-old sparkler is pure and refreshing with a rounded texture and the telltale honeysuckle, lemon and chamomile flavors of chenin blanc. (Wineberry America, New York)La Ferme du Vert Gaillac L’Ange Lou Mousseux Brut 2013, 11.0 percent, $18Mauzac is one of many little-known grapes historically grown in the southwest of France. Some have faded away, replaced by more familiar names, but a handful of producers who prize the distinctive qualities of these grapes have nursed them along. This sparkler, 100 percent mauzac, is lively and refreshing, with intriguing apple, straw and herbal flavors, delicious on a hot sunny day. (Camille Rivière Selection/Fruit of the Vines, Long Island City, N.Y.)Le Côtes de Provence de Château Pradeaux 2014, 12.5 percent, $19Château Pradeaux is one of my favorite producers in Provence. Its Bandols are determinedly old school, requiring years of aging to reveal their depths. Even its Bandol rosé improves with age. This Côtes de Provence is made just like the Bandol, but with grapes grown just outside the Bandol appellation. It’s a joyous wine, pale in color, fresh and inviting, and you can guzzle it without waiting. (Rosenthal Wine Merchant, New York)Edmunds St. John Bone-Jolly El Dorado County Witters Vineyard Gamay Noir Rosé 2014, 12.6 percent, $20This is a darker, more substantial rosé than those of the typical washed-out Provençal color. Steve Edmunds preserves the lively acidity in these gamay noir grapes from the Sierra Foothills, resulting in a wine that is fresh and juicy, with earthy, mineral flavors that linger long after you swallow.Ameztoi Getariako Txakolina 2014, 11.0 percent, $20If you want to know what the Basque people of northern Spain drink with just about anything, it’s Txakolina, a fresh, crisp, seemingly simple wine that refreshes and invigorates the appetite. In the Getaria region, Txakolina like this one from Ameztoi is gently fizzy and bracing with briny, dry citrus flavors. The Basque do indeed drink it with everything, but it goes especially well with fresh seafood. (De Maison Selections, Chapel Hill, N.C.)Luneau-Papin Muscadet Sèvre & Maine Sur Lie Clos des Allées Vieilles Vignes 2013, 12.0 percent, $16For so long Muscadet has been unappreciated but for its modest price and its remarkable affinity with raw oysters. Yet when farmed conscientiously and made carefully into wine, Muscadet can be deep and expressive, full of furtive delights. Luneau-Papin is one of those producers demonstrating the possibilities of Muscadet. Clos des Allées is creamy and energetic, with long, lingering mineral flavors. It’s great with many other sorts of seafood as well. (Louis/Dressner Selections, New York)Skouras Peloponnese Moschofilero Salto 2013, 11.5 percent, $19Greek wines have slowly been making a niche for themselves in the United States, especially the superb assyrtikos from Santorini. I love assyrtiko, but Greece offers so much more than that, like this moschofilero from the Peloponnese. With aromas and flavors of citrus, roses and tangy grapefruit, this wine is lip-smackingly good. (Diamond Importers, Chicago)Julian Haart Mosel Riesling 1,000L 2014, 10.5 percent, $18Julian Haart, one of the more exciting young German producers, makes this dry-tasting riesling from younger vines in the famous Piesporter Goldtröpfchen vineyard. It was fermented with indigenous yeasts in large, old 1,000 liter barrels. The result is an irresistible combination of steely minerality and creamy texture. (Vom Boden, New York)Hermann J. Wiemer Finger Lakes Dry Riesling 2014, 12.0 percent, $20Hermann J. Wiemer is one of the pioneering producers of the Finger Lakes of New York. Wiemer’s success with riesling helped to persuade ambitious winemakers that it ought to be the signature white grape of the region. And Wiemer continues to roll along, invigorated by new ownership. The 2014 dry riesling is bright, refreshing and subtle, a floral style of riesling but with plenty of minerality, too.Leo Steen Chenin Blanc Dry Creek Valley Saini Farms 2013, 12.7 percent, $20In recent years, chenin blanc has been making a heartening comeback in the United States. Leo Hansen, the proprietor of Leo Steen, has been right in the middle of it, making excellent chenins over the last decade. The 2013 is bright and light yet with the characteristic thick chenin blanc texture. It’s bone dry with floral, citrus and honey flavors.Nicolas Gonin Isère – Balmes Dauphinoises Blanc Classique 2013, 12.0 percent, $20Is there anything still to discover in French wine? Consider the Balmes Dauphinoises, an almost-unknown area in the region of Isère between the Rhône Valley and the Alps. There, Nicolas Gonin makes great wines mostly from little-known, organically grown grapes like persan and jacquère. This white is an exception, a blend of chardonnay, viognier and pinot gris with a little altesse thrown in for fun. It’s dry and savory with a saline edge, fascinating and lovely. (M.F.W. Wine Company/T. Elenteny Imports, New York)Eminence Road Farm Winery Gamay Noir Cayuga Lake 2013, 11.3 percent, $20Excellent versions of gamay noir, the grape of Beaujolais, are showing up all over the West Coast and now in the East. This wine, meticulously made from Finger Lakes grapes, is light-bodied, earthy, fruity and seriously delicious, a true vin de soif, as the French say, perfect for killing thirst. Drink lightly chilled.Jean-Marc Burgaud Morgon Côte du Py 2013, 13.0 percent, $20While the Eminence Road gamay is deliciously gulpable, this Beaujolais from Jean-Marc Burgaud, also made of gamay, is a true terroir wine. It, too, is gorgeous and refreshing, but its deep, complex, lingering flavors of iron, earth and flowers scream of the Côte du Py, the famed slope of Morgon. A wonderful value from an underappreciated producer. (Maximum Wine, Englishtown, N.J.)Éric Texier Côtes du Rhône Chat Fou 2012, 12.5 percent, $17Côtes du Rhônes made primarily of grenache can sometimes seem lacking in energy. But the always inventive Éric Texier has made a lighter, fresher style of Côtes du Rhône by blending grenache with white Rhône grapes like clairette, marsanne and chasselas. With 80 percent grenache, it’s definitely red, but the blend has a spicy bite to it that’s quite refreshing. (Louis/Dressner Selections, New York.)D. Ventura Ribeira Sacra Viña do Burato 2012, 12.0 percent, $15Mencía grown in the slate soils of the Ribeira Sacra region of Galicia can yield some of the loveliest red wines of Spain. Viña do Burato from D. Ventura is an entry-level mencía, with gorgeous, tangy fresh fruit flavors and a hint of the intriguing minerality that can make Ribeira Sacra so captivating. (De Maison Selections, Chapel Hill, N.C.)Benoit Roseau I.G.P. Collines Rhodaniennes Syrah de Rosette 2012, 11.5 percent, $20This smoky, savory, light-bodied syrah comes from the Collines Rhodaniennes, hillside vineyards outside the most esteemed areas of the northern Rhône. It’s not a wine that suggests the mysteries of terroir. It’s simply pure pleasure and low in alcohol. Lightly chilled, it’s perfect with charcuterie. (M.F.W. Wine Company/T. Elenteny Imports, New York)Montinore Estate Willamette Valley Pinot Noir 2013, 12.8 percent, $20Every year Montinore manages to release inexpensive pinot noirs from the Willamette Valley that are light, balanced, juicy and simply delicious to drink. What’s more, the grapes are farmed biodynamically. The wine, pale ruby with balanced, lively flavors of spicy red fruit, is proof that even in prestigious regions, moderately priced wine can be made with love and care.Bebame El Dorado County Red 2012, 13.0 percent, $20I used to lament the difficulty of finding good, inexpensive yet genuinely interesting California wines. Now, I’m finding more and more like Broadside’s Paso Robles cabernet sauvignon, Steve Matthiasson’s Tendu project, and this wine, Bebame, made by Steve Edmunds of Edmunds St. John for an outfit called Aha Wines. Made of 93 percent cabernet franc and 7 percent gamay noir, it’s lively, taut, refreshing and just right for burgers on the grill. All it lacks are pretensions.De Forville Dolcetto d’Alba 2013, 13.5 percent, $15Dolcetto from the Piedmont region of northwestern Italy continues to be an underrated wine and hence a great value. This is classic Dolcetto d’Alba, with bright, inviting flavors of red fruit, refreshingly bitter with an underlying bass note of bittersweet dark chocolate. It draws you back again and again. (Rosenthal Wine Merchant, New York)Bodega Chacra Amor Seco Patagonia Merlot 2012, 14.0 percent, $20Yes, merlot. Merlot from Argentina. Did you think Argentina only made malbec? This wine is gorgeous, energetic and slightly tannic with flavors of red fruit and just the right sort of light bitterness to keep it refreshing. Bodega Chacra is known for making superb pinot noirs (yes, Argentina makes pinot noir, too). This is a worthy addition. (Grand Cru Selections, New York)Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.Advertisement