https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/02/dining/tasting-dom-perignon-from-various-decades.html
Tasting Dom Pérignon From Various Decades - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
566
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovTime is easily quantifiable yet unknowable, at least as it affects wine. We know wine ages in the bottle, but how will it evolve, and why? We can estimate based on experience, but we are never really sure. Time was the subject at a remarkable dinner recently at NoMad, featuring 16 vintages of Dom Pérignon Champagne. As complex a subject as time is for still wine, it’s even more complicated for Champagne, which undergoes a second fermentation in a closed bottle after yeast and a sugar solution are added. As the yeast consumes sugar in the bottle, its byproduct, carbon dioxide, produces the bubbles that give Champagne its sparkle.When fermentation finishes, the yeast dies. But its work is not done. The yeast sediment, or lees, settles to the bottom of the bottle, where it continues to contribute to the wine’s flavor, texture and ability to protect against oxidation. Eventually, the bottle is turned upside down so that the lees gather at the mouth of the neck. When the cellar master gives the word, the neck is plunged into ice-cold brine, which freezes the lees in a clump. Then the bottle is opened and the pressure of the carbon dioxide ejects, or disgorges, the clump, leaving clear sparkling wine.The timing of disgorgement is crucial. Mass-market Champagnes may be kept on the lees for a short time and to little effect. Dom Pérignon, always a vintage Champagne, will generally spend several years, if not more, on the lees, allowing this interaction to play an integral role in shaping the wine’s character. Eventually, 8 to 10 years after the harvest, most bottles will be released.But Dom Pérignon keeps a significant fraction of its Champagne aging on lees for an extended period. Eventually, 15 to 16 years after the vintage, a portion of these bottles will be released. A few other Champagne houses do something similar, most famously Bollinger, which calls these wines R.D., for récemment dégorgé, or recently disgorged. Since 2000, Dom Pérignon has periodically released these older wines under the Oenothèque name, which connotes library. But with the 1998 vintage, the newest such release, the name has been changed to P2.“Oenothèque is a term common to the world of wine,” said Richard Geoffroy, the chef de cave, or head, of Dom Pérignon. “P2 is singular to Dom Pérignon and its development in plateaus.”This is how Mr. Geoffroy measures the aging of Dom Pérignon, not in a continual arc of evolution but in a series of plateaus, or, as he often calls them, plenitudes. The original release represents the first plenitude, and the P2 the second.“The first plenitude represents a state of completeness, a platform of harmony,” Mr. Geoffroy said. “The second is energy, radiance, vibrancy, precision.”Mr. Geoffroy often speaks in phrases that sound close to riddles, yet which make sense. He prefers to think of wines in terms of colors they evoke, pale blues and cloudy grays for D.P., rather than in terms of aromas and flavors. In the dining room at NoMad, Mr. Geoffroy’s words cast an almost hypnotic thrall over the small group of collectors gathered around the table, along with Tim Kopec, a longtime sommelier who had organized the dinner with Mr. Geoffroy, and me. Three of the wines we’d drink, 2002, 2003 and 2004, were original releases, or first plenitudes. The other 13 were Oenothèque wines in vintages stretching from 1996 to 1959, along with the newly christened 1998 P2.If this seems impossibly pretentious, well, maybe, but I prefer to think of it as an academic exercise. “It’s the relationship of yeast to the wine, and how it contributes to more intensity, complexity and texture,” Mr. Geoffroy said.I loved the cool, cucumbery, savory 2004, but in the first round of wines, the 2003 was the most surprising. It was a scorchingly hot, difficult year, and most Champagne houses did not issue a vintage wine. The D.P. ’03 was floral, structured and big on the palate with a full helping of Dom Pérignon’s signature salinity. “There are challenges you cannot turn down,” Mr. Geoffroy said. “Nobody would have complained if we hadn’t made the wine. This is one of the vintages most important to us.”It’s worth noting that while Dom Pérignon is perhaps the most famous Champagne in the world, it is far better known as a brand than a wine, invoked more often for what it signifies than for how it feels and tastes.Its fame and prevalence make it an ideal symbol for populist representations of wine snobbery — the Crane brothers in the old sitcom “Frasier” often poured D.P. If they only knew how déclassé flutes are considered nowadays! At NoMad, it was served in ample white-wine glasses. By contrast, its prevalence also makes it an ideal target for Champagne snobs who confuse scarcity with quality. Dom Pérignon will not release production figures, but the output is thought to be in the low millions of bottles per vintage. What’s astonishing about Dom Pérignon is not how much is made, but how great the wine is despite the high production. I don’t have the opportunity to drink Dom Pérignon often, but when I do, I am reminded how distinctive it is: sleek, elegant, shy in a way, even quiet, yet intense and insistent.“Tension, balance, the strength of fragility,” Mr. Geoffroy told me. “Dom Pérignon is really about ambivalence.”Part of the ambivalence is in its blend of grapes, a near split between chardonnay and pinot noir depending on the vintage. In an age when Champagne lovers have grown interested in the notion of terroir in Champagne, representing the qualities of a particular vineyard or village, Dom Pérignon remains a paragon of the art of blending, using grapes from 21 different villages.After the first round, we tasted decade by decade. The ’98, the first wine labeled P2, was ripe and substantial yet cool, youthful and balanced. The ’96, a singular vintage, was concentrated and intense, with a huge dose of umami aromas. Yet it was the beautifully balanced 1990, Mr. Geoffroy’s first year at Dom Pérignon, that captured our attention, sleek, saline, graceful and alive.“There’s a kind of weightless opulence to it,” Mr. Geoffroy said.A trio from the ’80s showed the benefits of a little more age: ’88 was lithe and clear, with aromas of truffle and smoke; ’85 was open and expansive but disappeared next to the terrific ’82, which built in length and intensity over the course of half an hour in the glass. I loved the ’82.The ’76 was clean and pure, but paled next to the elegant, kaleidoscopic ’75 (“like a dry Yquem,” Mr. Geoffroy said), and the precise, complex ’73. By the time we got to three wines from the ’60s and a 1959, the Champagnes had taken on another dimension. A ’69 evoked tea, coffee and truffles, more brown than gray in Mr. Geoffroy’s parlance. A ’64 was not quite right, but a ’62 was deep and exotic, full of spice and fruit flavor and the ’59, the first wine with notably diminished bubbles, evoked tobacco, earth and anise.It was hard not to be impressed with the longevity, nuance and consistent character of these wines, which nonetheless reflected their vintage differences. The last set of wines had spent an average of 30 years on lees before disgorgement — “P3s,” Mr. Geoffroy called them. The only thing missing was an opportunity to taste not vertically down through vintages, but horizontally, so we could compare P1s, P2s and, if the vintages were old enough, P3s.“One day,” Mr. Geoffroy said, “but we’re not ready for that yet.”Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov.Advertisement