https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/09/us/politics/money-politics-corruption-scandal.html
Affairs, Pheasant Feathers and White House Stays: 6 Big Money-in-Politics Scandals - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1640
AdvertisementSupported byBy Mihir ZaveriOvernight stays in the White House for wealthy donors. A re-decoration of a congressional office with red walls and a plume of pheasant feathers. An elaborate strategy to hide an affair and a pregnancy.The list of scandals related to money in politics got two new additions last month. In one, Michael D. Cohen, President Trump’s former lawyer and fixer, pleaded guilty to breaking campaign finance laws.Mr. Cohen said in court that Mr. Trump had directed him to arrange payments to two women — a pornographic film star and a former Playboy model — during the 2016 campaign to keep them from speaking publicly about affairs they said they had with Mr. Trump.In the other, Representative Duncan Hunter, Republican of California, was accused of using $250,000 in campaign funds on personal expenses and lying to the Federal Election Commission.Experts say the majority of campaign finance law violations are clerical errors or missed deadlines, and are rectified by the parties involved. Many result in civil penalties — President Barack Obama’s 2008 campaign paid a $375,000 penalty to the F.E.C., largely for failing to notify regulators of contributions totaling $1,000 or more within 48 hours of receiving them.But other cases are more extraordinary, like the vast fund-raising operation that enabled the Watergate break-in.In fact, quite a few recent high-profile political scandals have had a campaign finance twist. Let’s take a look.____He became known as the “Love Gov.”In April 2017, Gov. Robert Bentley, Republican of Alabama, stepped down under threat of impeachment and amid accusations that he was having an affair with his senior political adviser, Rebekah Caldwell Mason.A report by a special counsel to a state legislative committee had said that Mr. Bentley encouraged “an atmosphere of intimidation” around his staff to keep them from speaking of his relationship with Ms. Mason, and that he had directed state employees to cover up the relationship. (Mr. Bentley had denied a physical relationship with Ms. Mason long before he resigned, despite recordings that suggested physical intimacy.)Central to Mr. Bentley’s resignation was a guilty plea to two misdemeanor charges: failing to file a major contribution report and knowingly converting campaign contributions to personal use.The report describes how Mr. Bentley tried to use a member of his security detail to break up with Ms. Mason on his behalf, and how Mr. Bentley demanded that she be allowed to travel in official vehicles after she left the state’s payroll.Before the plea deal, the Alabama Ethics Commission had said it had probable cause to find that Mr. Bentley had committed felonies before he resigned, and had referred its findings to prosecutors.[Make sense of the people, issues and ideas shaping the 2018 elections with our new politics newsletter.]____In 2015, Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, was charged with bribery-related crimes based on his relationship with an eye doctor, Salomon E. Melgen.Prosecutors said Dr. Melgen made more than $700,000 in direct and indirect political contributions to Mr. Menendez. Within days of one set of contributions, Mr. Menendez pressed federal officials to intervene in a Medicare billing dispute worth almost $9 million to Dr. Melgen. As evidence of illicit behavior, prosecutors also pointed to private flights for Mr. Menendez, as well as travel to a luxury hotel in Paris and seaside stays in the Dominican Republic.Mr. Menendez maintained that he and Dr. Melgen were just close friends. The federal corruption trial for the two men ended in a mistrial in November.Prosecutors initially said they intended to retry Mr. Menendez, but after a judge said some elements of their case were “empty of relevant evidential fact,” the Justice Department dropped the charges.In a separate case, Dr. Melgen was convicted of Medicare fraud in April 2017.As Mr. Menendez faces re-election in November, Republican efforts to defeat him have seized on the case.____When Aaron Schock joined the House in 2009, he was 27, and a rising Republican star from Illinois.He pushed for more trade with Colombia, and attracted attention for his Instagram account with photos showing him surfing or glacier-jumping.But in 2015, Mr. Schock resigned amid accusations that he had used taxpayer and campaign funds on private jets and concerts, and had failed to report extravagant gifts on financial disclosure forms.He was also criticized for a series of office renovations that included blood-red walls, a crystal chandelier and a plume of pheasant feathers. The renovations were compared to the environs seen on the show “Downton Abbey,” and mocked by many. Mr. Schock had never “seen ‘Downton Abbey’ and did not request an office designed like it,” his lawyer said in 2016.Mr. Schock eventually paid back the government tens of thousands of dollars for the renovations, according to The Associated Press.In 2016, he was indicted on charges including wire fraud and theft of government funds. His trial date is scheduled for early 2019.____An illicit affair, a pregnancy and a scheme to hide them during the 2008 presidential race.That would become the focus of a trial in 2012 over whether John Edwards, a former Democratic presidential candidate, vice-presidential nominee and senator, broke campaign finance laws as part of the cover-up. A two-year investigation led to his indictment by a federal grand jury in 2011.Mr. Edwards began the affair with a campaign videographer, Rielle Hunter, in 2006; she became pregnant the next year. Prosecutors said Mr. Edwards had used about $1 million to hide Ms. Hunter from his wife, Elizabeth Edwards, and the public. They also said he initially had an aide claim paternity of the child, who was born in 2008. Mr. Edwards admitted the child was his in 2010.Mrs. Edwards died that December after battling cancer. One of her closest friends testified about the emotional turmoil Mrs. Edwards went through to believe that her husband had not conceived a child with Ms. Hunter.A jury could not reach a verdict on five charges of campaign finance fraud and conspiracy, and found Mr. Edwards not guilty on one other charge. Federal prosecutors later said they would not retry him.____The Democratic Party’s fund-raising tactics during the 1996 presidential campaign, including overnight stays for top donors in the White House’s Lincoln Bedroom, became the subject of much controversy.It would emerge that President Bill Clinton had personally approved a plan, years earlier, to reward Democratic donors and fund-raisers with meals, golf outings and jogs with him, as well as stays in the Lincoln Bedroom to “energize” them for his re-election campaign. Critics referred to the selling of the Lincoln Bedroom.After Mr. Clinton’s re-election, the administration released a list of 938 guests who stayed in the Lincoln Bedroom and other rooms, including some who did not donate.Mr. Clinton largely defended the visits, saying that the guests had stayed as friends, not as contributors.The scandal was soon overshadowed by revelations of Mr. Clinton’s affair with a White House intern, Monica Lewinsky.____Another scandal tied to that campaign would follow Vice President Al Gore for years.In 2000, a longtime fund-raiser for Mr. Gore was convicted of five felony counts for helping arrange illegal donations to the Democratic Party and its candidates in 1996. About $55,000 of that was in connection with a visit by Mr. Gore to a Buddhist temple in the Los Angeles area during the campaign.Prosecutors said that the fund-raiser, Maria Hsia, arranged for nuns and monks to write checks to make it seem that they were the donors to the Democratic National Committee. But they were actually reimbursed by the temple, a religious, tax-exempt institution barred from making political contributions.Mr. Gore’s credibility regarding what he knew came under scrutiny.The scandal resurfaced during his failed 2000 presidential run. “Who’s he going to be today?” one television ad asked. “The Al Gore who raises campaign money at a Buddhist temple? Or the one who promises campaign finance reform?”Alain Delaquérière contributed research.Follow Mihir Zaveri on Twitter: @MihirZaveri.Advertisement