http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/26/arts/television/review-the-carmichael-show-with-jabs-and-jokes-has-its-debut-on-nbc.html
Review: ‘The Carmichael Show,’ With Jabs and Jokes, Has Its Debut on NBC - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1232
AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil GenzlingerYou remember your mother’s admonition: “If you can’t say something nice, don’t say anything at all.” In that spirit, let’s just say that “The Carmichael Show,” a comedy that begins Wednesday on NBC, is marginally better than the awful “Mr. Robinson,” another comedy the network disgorged this month.Like “Mr. Robinson,” which stars Craig Robinson, “The Carmichael Show” is a vehicle for a stand-up comic to tell a vaguely autobiographical tale. And, like “Mr. Robinson,” it’s a cliché-filled mélange featuring terrible acting.But at least it tries to be more, and occasionally it succeeds. Jerrod Carmichael stars as a young man who, as the series opens, has recently begun living with his girlfriend, Maxine (Amber Stevens West). The premiere centers on the couple’s anxiety about telling Jerrod’s parents about the cohabitation.Those parents are played by David Alan Grier, who, as usual, makes irascible irritating, and Loretta Devine, whose braying portrayal is gratingly familiar. Equally annoying are Lil Rel Howery as Bobby, Jerrod’s brother, and Tiffany Haddish as Bobby’s wife. Tyler Perry has shown that a family defined by volume can be crowd-pleasing, so maybe this one will find an audience. And the show deserves some credit for making an effort to put some substance into its relentless back-and-forth of one-liners. For instance, in the second episode, which is also being broadcast on Wednesday night, Jerrod is miffed because it’s his birthday, but his spotlight has been stolen by a police shooting of an unarmed black youth in the neighborhood. The women want to join the resulting protest, but Mr. Grier’s character is against it. “Protests are filled with too much sexual energy,” he says. “I don’t need my wife around all those rebellious black men. Protests make you sexy; it’s a fact.” Some viewers may feel that it’s too soon to be playing Ferguson, Mo., and related incidents for laughs, and it’s done in a clunky point-counterpoint way, Mr. Grier’s character voicing a conservative-black viewpoint.“Sometimes there’s a legitimate reason to protest, but sometimes I say to myself, why are they running from the cops in the first place?” he says. “You think just because he’s black, he’s innocent?” To which Maxine responds, “No matter what he did, he was unarmed.” Welcome to High School Debate 101.The third episode gets back to more frivolous subject matter, taking on the scourge of kale. It does nod to the serious issues of diet and health among black Americans, but only gently. The show needs to figure out whether it wants to push the envelope or be just another multicamera family sitcom. And if it chooses the first option, it needs to ask more of its actors than merely volleying laugh lines.Advertisement