https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/06/movies/golden-globes-2019.html
‘A Star Is Born’ and ‘Vice’ Lead the 2019 Golden Globes Nominations - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1194
AdvertisementSupported byGolden Globes BriefingBy Brooks Barnes• “A Star Is Born,” “Vice” and “The Favourite” were among the leading film nominees for the Golden Globes. “Black Panther” was nominated for best drama.• “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel,” “Killing Eve” and “Barry” were among those recognized in TV categories. The British thriller “Bodyguard” was definitely a surprise nominee.• Where was “Widows”? Steve McQueen’s heist movie didn’t receive any nominations. Read about more movie snubs and surprises.• See the full list of nominees. The 76th Golden Globe Awards will be held on Jan. 6 at the Beverly Hilton Hotel in Los Angeles. Andy Samberg and Sandra Oh will host.LOS ANGELES — Golden Globes voters pulled the contentious comedy “Green Book” and the still-to-be-released Dick Cheney biopic “Vice” deeper into the Oscar race on Thursday, while embracing the critically acclaimed “A Star Is Born” and “The Favourite.”The largest number of movie nominations — six — went to Adam McKay’s “Vice,” including ones for best musical or comedy, director, screenplay, actor (Christian Bale), supporting actress (Amy Adams, also nominated for HBO’s “Sharp Objects”), and supporting actor (Sam Rockwell, a winner last year). Bradley Cooper’s hit romance “A Star Is Born,” the mischievous period comedy “The Favourite” and “Green Book” each received five nominations.But there were also prominent snubs. Damien Chazelle’s cerebral space race drama “First Man” received attention for Claire Foy’s acting and Justin Hurwitz’s score but was otherwise passed over. Ethan Hawke (“First Reformed”) and Hugh Jackman (“The Front Runner”) got the cold shoulder. And the rapturously reviewed Korean mystery “Burning” was shut out of the foreign film category.[See a list of nominees | Movie snubs and surprises | TV snubs and surprises]The group behind the Globes, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, supported a large number of films with diverse casts and racial themes. Vying against “A Star Is Born” and the blockbuster “Bohemian Rhapsody” as best drama contenders will be the superhero smash “Black Panther,” the melancholy “If Beale Street Could Talk” and Spike Lee’s “BlacKkKlansman.” (But the group ignored the Viola Davis vehicle “Widows.”)“Crazy Rich Asians” drew two nominations, for Constance Wu’s acting and best musical or comedy, a category that also included “The Favourite,” “Green Book,” “Mary Poppins Returns” and “Vice.”Here are five more things to consider about the Globes nominations.The Globes are seen as the most unserious stop on the road to the Oscars, which will take place on Feb. 24. Only 88 people vote on the Globe nominees and winners. And the top Globes are split into dramatic and comedic categories, often in nonsensical ways.In a head-scratching policy for an awards program adjudicated by reporters from overseas, foreign-language films are ineligible for the marquee best picture categories. So the nominations did not offer much guidance on the Oscar fortunes of “Roma,” Alfonso Cuarón’s blissfully reviewed epic that has become a lightning rod in Hollywood because it comes from Netflix, which is challenging the traditional model for releasing films. (“Roma” will play in about 600 theaters worldwide while also streaming online, starting Dec. 14.). “Roma” was among the best foreign film nominees, as expected, while Cuarón was recognized for best screenplay and best director.Movie fans may also be confused by the inclusion of “A Star Is Born” in the best drama category. The romantic remake is plenty dramatic, but the Globes has a whole category specifically for musicals and comedies. “A Star Is Born” has lots of singing, and the 1976 version starring Barbra Streisand won the Globe for best musical. What’s the deal this time around? It boils down to category shopping: “A Star Is Born” producers wanted to compete in the dramatic category, which is seen as having more heft.A parade of films (“Beautiful Boy,” “Eighth Grade,” “A Quiet Place,” “The Old Man & the Gun”) ended up with a lone nomination. That’s how Globes voters roll: Spread the love.But “Green Book,” adored by some for its feel-good depiction of interracial friendship while leaving others appalled by its reliance on racial clichés, emerged as a factor in five categories, including Viggo Mortensen’s lead acting, Mahershala Ali’s supporting work, best screenplay and Peter Farrelly’s direction. The strong showing for “Green Book” could give the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences cover to embrace it as well.Reacting to his nomination, Mortensen, in a statement, positioned the movie as one that “inspires hope and compassion” while inviting audiences to “think profoundly about our society’s past and present.”Walt Disney Studios, despite its box-office brawn, has never been much of an awards force outside of animation. (Unless you count the years it owned Miramax, which functioned as a rogue planet.) This year, however, Disney has “Mary Poppins Returns,” which has not yet been reviewed by critics — it doesn’t arrive in theaters until Dec. 19 — but has been generating glowing advance buzz. It received a nod for best musical or comedy, along with acting nominations for Emily Blunt and Lin-Manuel Miranda and one for Marc Shaiman’s score. In addition to best drama, Disney’s “Black Panther” received attention in the song and score categories.By the time the Globes ceremony arrives, Disney may also have closed its $71.3 billion acquisition of most of 21st Century Fox. That would make Disney the owner of Fox Searchlight, which received 10 nominations in total, including nods for Richard E. Grant and Melissa McCarthy in “Can You Ever Forgive Me?”Another Fox studio going to Disney is behind “Bohemian Rhapsody,” starring Rami Malek, who received a best actor nomination for his toothy performance as Freddie Mercury. In the final totals, Disney had nine nominations and the Fox companies had 25, including those for FX in the television races.“All of the nominees from Fox!” Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, wrote on Twitter. “So much to look forward to!”This Dick Cheney biopic, directed and written by McKay (“The Big Short”), has been hanging back. It won’t arrive in theaters until Christmas Day. But “Vice” has now made its break.The inclusion of McKay in the director category came as a surprise to most awards handicappers. Squeezed out of the director race was Yorgos Lanthimos, the force behind “The Favourite,” which compensated with acting nominations for Olivia Colman, Emma Stone and Rachel Weisz.Because the press association’s nominations arrive as Oscar voters are gearing up for their own selection process, the movie-related Globe categories receive most of the attention. But the truth is that the Globes ceremony draws much of its power from TV stars — and the desire by voters to be tastemakers by throwing their weight behind fledgling series. In recent years, the Globes have helped put streaming-service shows like “Transparent” and “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” on the map.In the best television drama category, newcomers dominated, with nominations going to the thriller “Killing Eve,” starring Sandra Oh as a security services operative; the boisterous “Pose,” the latest hit from Ryan Murphy; “Homecoming,” a cerebral thriller starring Julia Roberts; and the pulpy British thriller “Bodyguard.” The remaining slot went to “The Americans,” for its final season.One reminder: Two stalwarts, “Game of Thrones” and “Stranger Things,” were not eligible this time around because no new episodes of either series aired in 2018.Among comedies, awards handicappers predict that it’s going to be hard to unseat the reigning winner, “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel.” Newcomers among the nominees were “Barry,” the off-kilter HBO series starring the also-nominated Bill Hader and Henry Winkler; Jim Carrey’s grief dramedy “Kidding” on Showtime; and “The Kominsky Method” from Netflix, which also snagged nominations for its stars, Michael Douglas and Alan Arkin, who play showbiz war horses. “The Good Place” was also nominated for best comedy.The FX limited series “The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story” led all shows with four nominations, including for best TV movie or mini-series. Among television snubs, the twisty HBO sci-fi western “Westworld” received just one nod, for Thandie Newton’s acting, and the creators of NBC’s sentimental hit “This Is Us,” known for inspiring buckets of tears, might be shedding a few of their own: It was totally shut out.An earlier version of this article misidentified the streaming service that offers “The Kominsky Method.” It is Netflix, not Amazon.Jeremy Egner contributed reporting.Advertisement