https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/27/opinion/another-kind-of-girl.html
Opinion | Another Kind of Girl - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2525
AdvertisementSupported byOp-DocsBy KhaldiyaWhen I arrived at the Za’atari refugee camp in Jordan three years ago, I was overwhelmed. My family left our village in the region of Syria where the revolution began, after the area was bombed. My mother and six younger siblings and I suddenly became eight of the world’s 4.5 million Syrian refugees, and we have been living with 80,000 of them in our camp ever since.Life in a refugee camp was different from what I’d expected. While it is hard in many ways, it has challenged me to be stronger and more independent. Now I am sharing my experiences in this Op-Doc video, which I made through a media workshop at an activity center in the camp in 2014, working with a visiting filmmaker to film as much of my life as I could.Before learning to film, I felt like there was a huge part missing in my life. The only thing that filled it for me was filming. Filming makes me feel accomplished. I used to be shy, but when I started learning how to film, and also realized that the image of a refugee camp can be distorted by portrayals by outsiders, I knew that I needed to overcome this shyness — to speak not only to the community around me, but to people in the rest of the world. I walk through my days with my camera always in my hand, and when I encounter a scene I think people would be interested in seeing, I film it — life as it is.I’m filming from my own personal perspective. I live in the camp, I am within the camp, and I know the camp. An outsider will miss a lot of the deeper meanings because they haven’t felt what it’s like to live here.Now I am trying to pass on what I’ve learned about filmmaking to younger girls in this camp. I want to show the rest of the world that even though we live in a refugee camp, and have different lives from others, we still have dreams and ambitions. We are creative. We strive to rise above our limitations and work toward our dreams. I feel it’s my responsibility not just to tell the world that truth, but to let people see it for themselves.This video is part of a series produced by independent filmmakers who have received support from the nonprofit Sundance Institute.Now 18 years old, Khaldiya lives with her family in a camp for Syrian refugees in Jordan, where she documents her life on film through a media workshop. She is using only her first name here to protect her identity.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.OpinionKeith Fulton and Lou PepeAdvertisement