https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/14/arts/television/smaller-screens-truer-colors.html
Why ‘Diverse TV’ Matters: It’s Better TV. Discuss. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1661
AdvertisementSupported byBy Wesley Morris and James Poniewozik“Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to diverse TV.” So said Idris Elba at the Screen Actors Guild Awards last month. It was a reference, of course, to the furor over the Oscars’ all-white acting nominees. But Mr. Elba, who won awards that night for film and TV performances, was probably also aware that in the debate over whose stories get told on the screen, it’s the small one that seems to have the edge as the more inclusive medium.At least that’s what detractors of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences have been saying, and in the time since ABC made headlines by programming a slate of comedies (including “black-ish” and “Fresh Off the Boat”) created by and focusing on people of color, the television landscape certainly seems more diverse. But is that true, both in front of and behind the camera? Have more nonwhite actors and creators led to better television? Wesley Morris, a critic at large for The New York Times, and the chief television critic James Poniewozik take a closer look at shows like “The People v. O.J. Simpson” and “Master of None” to better understand what “diverse TV” really means.JAMES PONIEWOZIK In FX’s “The People v. O.J. Simpson,” Johnnie Cochran (Courtney B. Vance), the lawyer whose keen feel for racial fault lines will help get Mr. Simpson acquitted of murder, talks about a wrongful-death suit he pursued against the police. Sometimes, he says, “money is the only way to get justice.”It’s an ironic line, because we know Mr. Simpson will later lose a wrongful-death case against him. But it’s true, and — in a mini-series that exemplifies how essential race has become to some of today’s best television — it speaks a truth about how and why the medium has gotten better about race. Representing more people in more ways is the right thing to do, and it has made TV better. But it happened largely because there was money in it.There have been protests over the whiteness of TV before, as there are over the Oscars today. In 1999, the N.A.A.C.P. threatened a network boycott. There was some recasting, some behind-the-scenes hiring, some progress. But by fall 2008, there again was not a single minority lead in a new major network show. As Viola Davis said last year, “You cannot win an Emmy for roles that are simply not there.”But she said that while collecting an Emmy. What’s happened, in the years of “Empire” and “Jane the Virgin” and “black-ish” and “The Mindy Project,” is a change of both business and culture. TV audiences for everything are smaller now, which means networks aren’t programming each show for an imagined audience of tens of millions of white people. On top of that, there are younger viewers for whom diversity — racial, religious, sexual — is their world. That audience wants authenticity; advertisers want that audience.That’s a practical explanation. I also believe there’s an aesthetic one: Diversity is another way of saying specificity, and specificity is just more entertaining. The less homogeneous TV is, the less boring it is.WESLEY MORRIS TV is certainly less boring at the moment, and some of that energy has to do with the sudden proliferation of shows dealing with race (it’s a thing!), and on networks as varied as ABC, FX and HBO. Two of those shows, tellingly, have “American Crime” in the title, getting at an idea that in talking about this stuff we’re also talking about an original sin specific to us.But let’s explore the upside of that news: TV has prioritized making itself look a little more like the country watching it — and for any number of reasons: money, channels unto eternity, because it’s the right thing to do. Do I want to see Kerry Washington at the movies? Who doesn’t? But all that the movies have wanted her to do is look hot. So thank you, television — and Shonda Rhimes — for putting her in the arms of a sexy white president, then pushing him away, then pulling him back in, then, well, you get it. “Scandal” walks right up to original sin and pours it a glass of carignan.But the movies haven’t, to my eye, made so-called diversity a priority. And as our pal Manohla Dargis has noted, it’s pointless for us to keep getting bent out of shape one month of the year. Even when you have a spate of movies with people of color: What are they up to? Putting aside “Jefferson in Paris,” shtupping POTUS isn’t on the list. What’s great about TV right now is that there are so many shows with so many people doing so much that it feels kind of lawless. Specifically, there are more black, Latin and Asian women doing more interesting, different things on TV than in the whole history of movies.I’d like to focus on one, because just the thought of her moves me. It’s Niecy Nash, who played Didi on the dearly departed “Getting On” (HBO). This is a great office comedy set in a geriatric ward, and it’s full of inventive acting from all kinds of people. But, as a black woman playing a nurse, Ms. Nash has a familiar part that’s typically a background role. What this show does is find ways to shred that stock stereotype. In the first episode of the third season, Didi’s making the bed of a white female patient while complaining about the racial politics of “Imitation of Life.” Of Louise Beavers, she observes, “She was the greatest colored actress of her day, and all she wants to do is be this white woman’s maid — and for no money.” I’d say that that wasn’t all  Beavers wanted to do, but the sentiment resonates, anyway. And the casual way she does this all the while fanning sheets is poignantly funny. The show knows the limited historical terrain for a black actress and lays carpet atop it for Ms. Nash to walk. That feels like TV’s relationship to the movies with regard to race right now: You can do this, too.When people react to these exclusion conversations, you’d think the argument was for confiscation. This isn’t about less “white” TV, but about putting on other kinds of people than there have previously been. No one wants to take away anybody’s “The Affair” or “Bachelor in Paradise.” It’s just exciting to watch television in a time when a show will encourage Niecy Nash and Kerry Washington to look at America’s past and roll their eyes.PONIEWOZIK Too often the talk about inclusion frames it as reparations, a charitable act, a sacrifice. No one’s giving Ms. Washington or Ms. Nash anything by casting them on TV. We’re all getting something! We get to watch actors do great work, and we get TV that does what we want art to do: Show us something we haven’t seen before.Take Aziz Ansari’s “Master of None” on Netflix. It’s familiar stuff on the surface: a New York City relationship comedy. What makes it special is how it’s personal to its star: his gourmandism, his observations about social media and his Indian-American identity. Sometimes race comes to the fore — as in the episode “Indians on TV,” which critiques the idea that “there can only be one” character of a given minority background on a show. Sometimes it’s just part of the ambient environment. (When Mr. Ansari’s character, Dev, runs into an ex who’s gotten married to a man she says is from Connecticut, he passive-aggressively compliments her new “white” family; turns out her husband is black.)“Master of None” isn’t about being Asian; it’s about being Dev. His identity is part of him, like the characters in “Friday Night Lights” being specifically Texan. It makes them real people. And real people like shows about real people! Mr. Ansari made the great point on a recent episode of “The New Yorker Radio Hour” that it’s silly to assume white people can’t “identify” with an Asian character: “People watch animated movies about bugs and fish! They’re relating to those problems!”Now, why isn’t Mr. Ansari playing that kind of lead in the movies? Why is Ms. Davis playing a complex, fearsome, sexual antiheroine only on TV? Why was CW, not the movies, the place where Rachel Bloom of “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” could write herself a role as an emphatically Jewish woman with a hunky Filipino brah as her love interest and a cast as polychromatic as California?As a television partisan, I’d like to say that the long-form medium has more room to complicate characters and build worlds. But look again at “People v. O.J. Simpson,” which lays out an empathetic antagonism between two black lawyers, Johnnie Cochran and Christopher Darden, and shows the push-pull of racial versus gender politics, all within a ridiculously entertaining courtroom thriller: That’s an Oscar-bait movie! (It was even developed by the writers of “The People vs. Larry Flynt.”) Different business and artistic dynamics notwithstanding, I can’t help feel that the movies are just leaving a lot on the table here, and TV is eating its lunch.MORRIS Can we stay on “People v. O.J Simpson” for a moment? This is a rich landscape that really does have everything you could want from a television show: the right amount of gravitas and trashiness; aptly terrible acting (hi, person playing Kato Kaelin) and what, in Courtney B. Vance’s Johnnie Cochran, might be the performance of the year. He’s subtle and funny and humane and defiant and, impossibly enough under the circumstances, kind of sexy. It’s interesting to me that he’s playing a guy who awakens self-interested white men to the real problem of race while also crassly manipulating racism to tell a more panoramic story about America. That feels like a version of TV right now. There’s too much of it, sure. But there are so many of us. All you need to find a version of yourself — or your friends! — is a remote control and a streaming subscription. And given who we’re still not seeing enough of (Native Americans, gays, the working poor), there’s room to grow.Some of what we’re talking about is an end to tokenism, as Mr. Ansari noted. I remember as a teenager thinking that it was interesting that “Friends” had a white sextet. But making one of them not-white always seemed to risk introducing an inorganic realness the show was never meant to have. “Friends” was fine the way it was. It was also the product of the way television was at the time, when so-called black shows were on UPN and, for a minute, WB, implying that most of the rest of TV was white. The antidote to that problem wasn’t a black friend. It was “Girlfriends,” which began in 2000 and at the time was this oasis of bougie dramedy. Now, happily, it would just be another show on TV.Obviously, so-called diversity isn’t about just having one Asian dude on a show. It’s about a kind of plurality. There are at least five shows on plain-old network television starring or co-starring Latinas doing satirical comedy, physical comedy, dramatic comedy and whatever Jennifer Lopez has herself doing on NBC’s “Shades of Blue.” Is she severely miscast as a stressed-out, double-agent detective? Of course. But this is still better than “The Boy Next Door,” her recent stab at mattering at the movies. Maybe she keeps trying to matter on TV. Her radiance and natural humanness have rarely been better used than on “American Idol,” and they’ll be sorely missed when “Idol” bites the dust this year.What I like about “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” and “Master of None,” Jim, is precisely what you point out, which is that there are both imaginative and organic ways to make TV look like parts of the country without “alienating” anybody. Despite our unofficially segregated schools and neighborhoods, I like shows that work to achieve integrated casts without making integration look like work. “The People v. O.J. Simpson” achieves that feat while also keeping the legacies of race and racism on the hook.PONIEWOZIK I think we’re seeing the decline of the idea of “colorblindness” — art exists to help us see, after all — in favor of color awareness. Sometimes that means diversity across TV rather than within every show. The whiteness of “Girls” — those cliques exist — is less of a problem when you also have “Survivor’s Remorse” and “Being Mary Jane” and FX’s coming “Atlanta” with Donald Glover.One rare show that manages to be about both integration and segregation is “Orange Is the New Black.” It’s set in prison, where inmates self-sort by race, but also ally and clash across lines. It belly flops into waters other shows dab a toe in, because behind bars, the normal protocols for talking around race are suspended. Prison is truly where you stop being polite and start getting real.Speaking of which: For all the heat they take, reality shows often did more than scripted shows of their time to cast broadly; in 1994 “The Real World” aired TV’s first same-sex commitment ceremony, between a black man and a Hispanic man; NBC was still four years away from “Will & Grace.” But the genre has had its own problems of stereotyping and casting: We’re still waiting for a black Bachelor or Bachelorette, but we’re getting one on Season 2 of “UnREAL.”But tough-love time. Stipulating that TV is doing a lot well, there’s a lot it could do better. In 2014-15, according to the Directors Guild of America, 69 percent of TV episodes were directed by white men. And few drama creators at cable’s prestige networks — HBO, Showtime, FX, AMC, et al. — are minorities.That last bit matters because those are the pantheon-makers; they create the molds that future Don Drapers are poured into. And that’s where it may take more than market pressures to change things. In brazenly commercial network TV, money talks, and “Scandal” begets “Quantico.” In awards-bait TV, it will also take powerful people deciding to do the right thing, like Ryan Murphy, who recently pledged to have women or minorities direct half of the episodes of his shows by the end of the year.But even in the empyrean reaches of premium cable, Shondaland has a voice. One of the best seasons in 2015 was HBO’s “The Leftovers,” whose co-creator Damon Lindelof added several black cast members, including a searing Regina King. In an interview with BuzzFeed, Mr. Lindelof said he’d noted how Ms. Rhimes made shows that were not entirely about race yet found organic ways to remind the audience, “But these are black people, just so you know.”I love that we’re at a place where an esteemed white male creator talks about what he’s learned from an esteemed black female creator. I’d love to get to a place where a black female creator is making an HBO drama series herself.MORRISThat’s funny, because I got a load of Ms. King’s cornrows on that show and thought, “Who in Jarden, Tex., is doing her hair?” That’s a detail six people would query. But it does get to an element of authenticity that Ms. Rhimes and her collaborators have mastered and that speaks to the value of having people of color at every stage of a production, beyond the writers’ room and directors. “The Leftovers” had a black woman, played by Amanda Warren, as mayor of the New York hamlet where the first season was set. How did she get there? Who voted for her? Did the other characters know she was black? Did she? That character landed in the canyon between what you observe, Jim, as colorblind casting and casting that’s color aware. People of color are aware of seeing themselves and can see when someone’s been blind to color.But whether he thought he’d miscast Ms. Warren (whose acting wasn’t a problem), Mr. Lindelof kept going and hired Ms. King, who did some of her best acting on this show. He didn’t stop there, though. He hired a handful of other black actors to explore some weird, otherworldly, grisly stuff: Darius McCrary, as a fortune teller; the veteran Steven Williams as the hoodooing father-in-law of Ms. King’s character; and Kevin Carroll, as her husband.With Mr. Carroll’s firefighter, the show was especially daring. Here was a black man prone to unexplained outbursts of violence that rhymed with the trauma of the show’s main protagonist, a white cop, played by Justin Theroux. These two were soul mates who didn’t understand that violence had cosmically drawn them to each other. Not everything Mr. Carroll was asked to do worked, not because he was black but because some of the character’s moves were false. But that’s entertainment.I don’t want to credit Ms. Rhimes for Mr. Lindelof’s risk-taking — he was already a gambler. But I do think when it comes to freeing actors of color to be bad, her influence is inevitable. Before “Empire,” her shows were among TV’s most nuts. And they had black people and Latinos and gay men at peak sociopath. On that front, “Empire” has already shattered her monopoly. I don’t know whether she feels Cookie and company breathing down her neck, but I’ve noticed an uptick in the insanity in Shondaland.I think people saw what Ms. Rhimes was getting away with and wanted to see whether they could, too. That, to me, has led to so many complicated depictions of, say, black men on television shows with integrated casts: on “The Knick” and “Jessica Jones” and “Fargo” and the underwhelming “Ballers” and “Brooklyn Nine-Nine” and “Hit the Floor” (Jim, are you watching this?) and all of those shows with “American” and “Crime” in the title. This goes to your plurality point: The more, the merrier — and less “problematic.” Popular culture has always struggled with how much its nonwhite protagonists can be anything other than saints. But television is comfortable at last with diversifying its galaxy of sinners.Advertisement