https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/16/arts/television/review-the-cryptic-sparkles-in-the-oa-reality-disappoints.html
Review: The Cryptic Sparkles in ‘The OA.’ Reality Disappoints. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
337
AdvertisementSupported byBy James PoniewozikTelevision loves a mystery box lately — puzzle series like “Westworld” and “Mr. Robot ” — and with the sudden announcement of “The OA” just days before its premiere on Friday, Netflix dropped one on our doorstep, rang the doorbell and ran.This eight-episode parapsychological drama, created by the indie filmmakers Brit Marling and Zal Batmanglij, was an enigma through its development, and the promotional stunt gave away little more: some cryptic tweets about death and darkness, a video snippet of a woman jumping off a bridge. Before the show even appeared, theorists were picking through the trailer frame by frame to guess what it was about.Netflix describes “The OA” as “a Russian nesting doll of a story.” I’d call it a beautifully painted eggshell, and I can’t recommend spending the seven-plus hours it takes to crack it and get to the hollow center.You might be a match for the show if you have a high tolerance for New Age woolgathering, if you consider hokey dialogue and amateurish characterization a fair trade-off for luminous atmosphere, if you enjoy ordering the most exotic item on the season’s video menu for the experience of having tasted it.If so, you’ll want to know very little going in, because this story depends on letting yourself be abducted into it. Prairie Johnson (Ms. Marling), the young woman on the bridge from that viral video, turns up after a seven-year disappearance, changed: She was blind when she vanished, and now she can see. She refers to herself without explanation, as “The OA.”Fragile and tentative, she moves back home to a Michigan suburb with her parents (Alice Krige and Scott Wilson) but won’t share details of her disappearance with them or the authorities. Instead, she opens up to a group of four teenage boys and their algebra teacher (Phyllis Smith), gathering them in an abandoned house for an unspecified “mission.”The story that very slowly emerges (involving Jason Isaacs and Riz Ahmed in roles it’s best not to detail) is part suburban melodrama, part sci-fi crime story, part shamanic ritual. It touches on near-death experiences and the rings of Saturn. It has the misfits-coming-together themes of “Stranger Things,” the cosmic connections of “Sense8” and a dream-journal preciousness all its own.Ms. Marling is an understated and intense screen presence, with the aura of someone who has seen things beyond our mortal ken. She seems like she’d make a great cult leader. (She played one in the 2012 indie “Sound of My Voice,” also made with Mr. Batmanglij.)Her performance is almost enough to make you believe that Prairie could get five strangers to buy into a wildly far-fetched story. It is almost enough to get you past the thinness of its characters — the tormented bully, the lonely Eleanor Rigby of a teacher — and the stock dreariness of its suburbs. It is not quite enough to sell writerly lines like, “I’m at the end of a rope I should have fallen off a long time ago.”Like so many streaming series, “The OA” feels long for length’s sake. It spends vast stretches with supporting characters without developing them. It’s a two-hour movie with a seven-hour-plus run time.The season becomes a thriller of sorts, but as it burrows into Prairie’s missing years, its real interest is in exploring the nature of consciousness. It’s a dreamcatcher of a story that works better the closer it gets to pure abstraction and fantasy. Mr. Batmanglij, the director, creates otherworldly images to represent altered mind states.It’s the reality that disappoints: No one in this story seems drawn from life, whether we see them from Prairie’s perspective or from outside it.The best thing I can say about “The OA” is that I’m glad it has a chance to exist. Unlike cable channels, which program to a specific brand identity, Netflix is pitching the broadest tent since the early days of television. In the same month, it has released Season 2 of “Fuller House” and this, a more idiosyncratic and daring series than anything HBO has shown since “John From Cincinnati.”Risks like this are polarizing. To me, the ending of “The OA” was ludicrous and cheaply provocative; some folks wired differently may find it haunting and profound. Just beware. This wonder box is gorgeously gift-wrapped, but the time you’ll invest in it is nonreturnable.The OAStreaming on Netflix.Advertisement