https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/06/dining/jj-johnson-chefs-club-nolita.html
JJ Johnson Is a Young Chef on the Rise, to a Hip-Hop Beat - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
172
AdvertisementSupported byBy Nikita StewartWith all the bravado of a hip-hop star who has walked away from a label to build his own, the chef Joseph Johnson was talking about his abrupt departure last summer from the Cecil, a Harlem restaurant praised for its innovative fusion of African, Asian and American cuisine.Settling into a booth at Chefs Club, the NoLIta restaurant where chefs from around the world take turns heading up the kitchen — and where Mr. Johnson is now in residence — he shouted over a playlist of 1990s hip-hop and R&B songs that he insisted have absolutely no repetition despite being 95 hours long.As one song transitioned to another, Mr. Johnson, who goes by JJ, dropped names. He compared himself to the chef Daniel Boulud. He talked about his hunger to become a restaurateur as prolific and accomplished as Drew Nieporent, Danny Meyer, David Chang and April Bloomfield. He referred to himself in the third person: “I’m just cooking me, JJ unleashed!”He said he didn’t mean to sound cocky. But then he did: “I made the Cecil iconic!” he declared.He is in a position to brag. Mr. Johnson, a protégé of the chef Alexander Smalls, an owner of the Cecil, is officially coming into his own. He is Chefs Club’s first long-term chef in residence, a stint that was initially limited to October and has been extended through December to meet the demand of reservations.On a Monday night a week after his residency began, Mr. Johnson was laughing and cooking before cameras and a boom microphone as Phil Rosenthal, the creator of “Everybody Loves Raymond,” interviewed the chef for his new Netflix food and travel show, “Somebody Feed Phil.”“They could have picked any chef in the world, and they picked me,” Mr. Johnson crowed.Amid all the work and publicity, Mr. Johnson is raising money for InGrained Hospitality Concepts, a group of new restaurants that he is planning, with a focus on rice and other grains. Mr. Johnson developed a passion for rice as he traveled the world and studied the African diaspora under the wing of Mr. Smalls. His parents also recalled his helping his grandmother clean rice as a boy.On his Chefs Club menu, rice makes more than one appearance, and rises to a star attraction in the form of “con’con,” a dish of jollof sticky rice about the size of a moon pie, sweetened with coconut and topped with an eggplant curry and basil. It exudes comfort and grandeur at once.He is cooking the food he wants, a right that he said was slipping away at the Cecil, which has recently rebranded itself as a steakhouse, with a new chef and a new menu. Gone are the collard green salad and the gumbo with Chinese chicken sausage, replaced by more-traditional fare like fried calamari, garlic spinach and steaks.How and why the Cecil went from a restaurant that aimed for uncharted tastes to one banking on mainstream crowd-pleasers is a matter of dispute among Mr. Johnson, Mr. Smalls and Richard D. Parsons, an owner of the Cecil and a former chief executive of Time Warner.Mr. Parsons said diners from outside Harlem were reluctant to trek during the week to the restaurant, at the corner of St. Nicholas Avenue and West 118th Street. And the menu was “too exotic,” he added, for the Cecil to become a weeknight habit for neighborhood residents.“You’re not actually looking for a cinnamon-dusted guinea fried hen with piri-piri rice on the side,” he said.Mr. Smalls, who remains an owner but had no hand in the new steakhouse menu, disagreed, blaming poor management and a business plan that he said failed to adequately adjust when a planned lunchtime seating never materialized.The Cecil is also tethered financially to Minton’s, a sibling restaurant next door that never found its niche as Harlem’s version of the Rainbow Room, as Mr. Smalls and Mr. Parsons had envisioned. “The Cecil was the workhorse in the brother-sister relationship,” Mr. Smalls said.As the owners tinkered to find the right formula, the restaurants closed, then reopened. Caught in the middle was Mr. Johnson, who started out as chef de cuisine of the Cecil and ended up as executive chef of both restaurants. The job, though, came with little autonomy.Mr. Johnson, 33, said he needed to lay a foundation for himself; his wife, Samiyyah Chapman; and their 3-month-old twins. He told his bosses he wanted a bigger role and more restaurants.“When they said to me they really didn’t want to do anything else, I had to go look in the mirror and say, ‘Would I be content here working for the next 10 years?’” he said. “At that point, I don’t mean to sound cocky, but I’m just better than that.” He resigned in June.All three men remain on good terms. In an interview, Mr. Parsons called Mr. Johnson “the illustrious JJ” with admiration. Together, Mr. Johnson and Mr. Smalls have written a 375-page cookbook, “Between Harlem and Heaven: Afro-Asian-American Cooking for Big Nights, Weeknights, and Every Day,” to be published in early February. (Veronica Chambers, who co-wrote the memoirs of the chefs Marcus Samuelsson and Eric Ripert, also collaborated on the cookbook.)Mr. Johnson has forged ahead alone in other ventures. He was trying to persuade Stephane De Baets, a founder and the president of Chefs Club, to invest in Ingrained Hospitality when another idea came to Mr. De Baets. “Why don’t you come do a pop-up to show me first your cuisine?” Mr. De Baets recalled asking him.In August, Mr. Johnson previewed dishes at Chefs Club Counter, a new fast-casual sister of Chefs Club. “Within half a day, all tickets were sold,” said Mr. De Baets, who is considering an investment in Mr. Johnson’s restaurant group.That success led to the longer stay at Chefs Club, a cavernous space with an open kitchen where diners can watch the chefs in action.Mr. Johnson has filled the menu with brightly colored dishes and flavors, seen most obviously in a shared plate of cornmeal-crusted sea bass, seasoned with turmeric, that takes up an entire bowl and leaves just enough room for purple sweet potatoes, roasted carrots, papaya and long beans.A few dishes, like udon noodles with braised goat, and piri-piri prawns, have followed Mr. Johnson to Chefs Club from the Cecil. His favorite dessert is a rice milk pop of raspberry and hibiscus with crispy puffed rice drizzled on top.At Chefs Club, Mr. Johnson also did something he could never do at the Cecil: He put his name on it, placing the neon letters “JJ” in the window. He also required the restaurant to play his days-long soundtrack, which he commissioned a D.J. to compile. On a recent night, several diners bobbed their heads and swayed in their seats.Music plays as much of a role in dining as food, Mr. Johnson said, recalling how his Puerto Rican grandmother played salsa while she prepared sofrito and plantain dumplings, and how his black American grandmother, raised in the Rocky Mountains, played Stevie Wonder, Michael Jackson and Earth Wind & Fire as she made cherry pies and traditional Southern food.His taste runs to ‘90s neo-soul and hip-hop. “That’s part of the diaspora,” he said. “That’s when I feel like black artists were having the best times in their careers. They were able to really put their music out. Like Biggie, Tupac, Wu-Tang, Mariah, Erykah Badu, they were talking about real stuff that was happening in our lives.”For $360, a diner can have everything on the menu in a tasting that Mr. Johnson calls “It Was All a Dream,” a nod to The Notorious B.I.G.’s “Juicy.”“This is a dream for me,” he said. “I get to the cook the food of who I am and listen to the music that I want to listen to.”Mr. Johnson said he also wants to create jobs and hire people who look like him. His give-back attitude appears to come from his parents, Marcela Johnson, a retired teacher, and Joe Johnson, a bookkeeper who still runs a youth basketball program in the Pocono Mountains of Pennsylvania, where they raised their son and his younger sister. The family traveled on vacation to Barbados, Puerto Rico, Jamaica and North Carolina — trips that, in reflection, helped him see the African diaspora firsthand.Though Mr. Johnson excelled in a variety of sports, including skiing, basketball and soccer, he wanted to be a chef. His mother insisted that, despite the expense, he study at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y. After graduating, he worked in New York at Tribeca Grill and the Smith, then as a personal chef and later in an executive dining room at Morgan Stanley.In 2011, as a contestant on “Rocco’s Dinner Party,” a Bravo reality TV show hosted by the chef Rocco DiSpirito, Mr. Johnson wooed the judges with a dish of smothered shrimp and grits.The meal caught the eye of Mr. Smalls, a South Carolina native, who said Mr. Johnson reminded him of his father, who would prepare the same Lowcountry dish for special occasions. Mr. Smalls reached out to Mr. Johnson, and they developed a teacher-apprentice relationship. Mr. Johnson accompanied Mr. Smalls on educational trip to Ghana, and that led to the job at the Cecil.Mr. Johnson is now likely on his way to achieving a fame that has eluded Mr. Smalls, who recalled an exchange with Josh Ozersky, the food critic who picked the Cecil as Esquire magazine’s best new restaurant in America in 2014.Saying the food was amazing, Mr. Ozersky told Mr. Smalls, “It’s a shame you won’t get credit for it.”Mr. Smalls remembered pushing back. “It’s not important that I’m the person that’s cooking the food and most remembered for it. It’s important that it’s remembered,” he said. “If I did something right in selecting a protégé who is going to make that a platform, then I ain’t mad.”Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.Advertisement