https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/01/arts/television/game-of-thrones-deaths.html
‘Game of Thrones’ Deaths: Every Major One So Far - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1685
AdvertisementSupported byBy Jennifer VineyardAll men must die on “Game of Thrones” — and women and children as well. Sometimes beloved characters depart much too soon, and sometimes villains get their just deserts. Here, we look back at notable deaths of “Thrones” characters — ranked from devastating to delicious — and hear from some of the actors who portrayed them. (Quotes that follow are edited excerpts from phone, email and in-person interviews.)Ned Stark (Sean Bean)Ned Stark seemed to be the main protagonist of “Game of Thrones,” a noble hero, a righteous man amid all the evil, and characters like that are not supposed to die in stories like this, right? But there was the boy king Joffrey, calling for his head, and then Ned on his knees, a sword unsheathed and ready to strike. Ned Stark’s sudden beheading not only started the War of the Five Kings, but it also signaled a key fact of life in the brutish Westeros — anyone can die, at any time.Hodor (Kristian Nairn)Hodor, he of the large frame and small vocabulary, was a figure of fun, not much more than Bran Stark’s source of travel plus comic relief. That was until his death “holding the door” revealed what he had lost long ago, via a time loop that made his service to Bran seem even more tragic. “It took me a while to feel O.K. with it,” Mr. Nairn said. “It’s just a beautiful thing to see a character you worked hard on, and did your best to breathe life into, mean so much to so many people. It’s a humbling experience watching people hurt and cry along to something you have done.”Shireen Baratheon (Kerry Ingram)Melisandre, the red priestess advising Stannis Baratheon, had burned plenty of people at the stake before Shireen, Stannis’s daughter, but none were as moving as the sweet little greyscale girl. She had been denied a loving relationship with her mother, Selyse, but screamed for her nonetheless, her cries moving even the coldhearted parent who had given birth to her (and who would later take her own life). Not so for Ms. Ingram. “I watched some of the YouTube reactions,” she said. “I just find them hilarious, which sounds really bad! But as an actor, watching what you’ve done to people is quite funny, because I’m quite evil. So if I see them crying, I go, ‘Ha ha!’”Catelyn and Robb Stark (Michelle Fairley and Richard Madden)The Red Wedding — a betrayal where you would least expect one — was painful to watch. The celebration was actually a trap meant to lure the Starks and their bannermen into an enclosed space without their weapons, where they would be caught off guard. One by one, the Starks fell — a pregnant Talisa was stabbed in the belly; a stunned Robb shot by crossbows, then stabbed in the heart; and an anguished Catelyn robbed of her eldest son. By the time her throat was slit, she had already given up — not knowing, as we did, that her other children were still alive.Ygritte (Rose Leslie)The Wildling warrior Ygritte saw Jon Snow, her former lover, across a crowded battlefield and paused, unable to shoot her arrow at him. He smiled. And then the young fighter Olly ruined the moment by shooting Ygritte instead. She died in Jon Snow’s arms as the battle raged on around them, a poignant moment that seemed to stop time. Ms. Leslie had read the books in advance knew she was doomed from the start, but she still got emotional when she was given Ygritte’s bow “as something I could remember my experience by.” She credits the show with getting her in the door with casting directors “who would never had given me the time of day” otherwise.Khal Drogo (Jason Momoa)The Dothraki leader Khal Drogo died for several reasons: because of a nasty wound infection; because of the deceptive witch Mirri Maz Duur, who pretended she would save him; and finally, because his grieving wife, Daenerys Targaryen, smothered him to free him from a permanent vegetative state. We mourned with Dany because she suffered a dual loss — both her husband and the baby, the witch’s blood magic “price” for Drogo’s brief borrowed time. But the witch’s words rang true when she explained why her actions saved countless others. Only death can pay for life.Rickon Stark (Art Parkinson)The death of the youngest Stark child was designed for impact. Ramsay Bolton wanted to lure Jon Snow out into the battlefield, so he played a sadistic game — setting Rickon free, telling him to run and shooting arrows at him as the boy raced toward his brother. “My last shot on the show was me on the floor of the battlefield, dying,” Mr. Parkinson said. “And as I lay there, I realized that this wasn’t just another death scene. This was the death of a character that I had done my best to build up and intensify over the years, however small that character was.”Jojen Reed (Thomas Brodie-Sangster)Like his traveling companion Bran Stark, Jojen Reed had psychic abilities known as the Sight. He knew what his fate would be, if not the specifics, and he proceeded anyway, turning his tutelage of Bran into a huge sacrifice. A gentle spirit, Jojen never carried weapons, which put him at a disadvantage when a skeleton wight grabbed his ankles and pulled him down into the snow and another one started stabbing him. Jojen’s anguished sister, Meera, slit her brother’s throat as an act of mercy. Her devotion to Bran ever since has been in Jojen’s honor, so he did not die in vain.Shae (Sibel Kekilli)Having just escaped from his dungeon cell, Tyrion Lannister made an ill-advised pit stop to visit the Tower of the Hand, only to discover that his father Tywin had taken over more than his former residence. Waiting for Tywin in bed was Shae, the prostitute Tyrion loved — which made him question everything in the split second before she grabbed a knife. Did she ever truly love him? Was she forced to betray him? We’ll never know, because Tyrion settled this lovers’ quarrel by strangling her. “George R.R. Martin told me that if he had known me earlier, he wouldn’t have had me killed,” Ms. Kekilli said of the author of the novels that inspired the series. “He liked my Shae better than the one in his books.”Oberyn Martell (Pedro Pascal)The Red Viper, the avenging prince from Dorne, seemed as if he were going to win the trial by combat, as the Mountain, the sadistic strongman loyal to the Lannister clan, was down for the count. But in Westeros, whenever we get overconfident, our legs can be swept out from underneath us, leaving us in the hands of a villain who can squash us like a bug. Or a watermelon, in Oberyn’s case.Olenna Tyrell (Diana Rigg)We never could get enough of the Queen of Thorns and her acid quips, or thank her enough for disposing of King Joffrey. She finally got a chance to take credit for her part in the regicide during the sack of Highgarden, when, instead of giving her a violent end, Jaime Lannister served her a glass of mercy. At least we now know that she never intended Joffrey’s poisoning to be quite so horrific.The Sand Snakes (Keisha Castle-Hughes, Jessica Henwick, Rosabell Laurenti Sellers)Oberyn Martell’s bastard daughters tried to give a good fight, but they never amounted to much of a force, succumbing to their own weapons of choice. Euron Greyjoy disarmed two of them, impaling Obara Sand with her favorite spear and choking Nymeria Sand with her own whip, and captured the third as a “gift” for the queen. Tyene — the Sand Snake who liked to slick her daggers with the Long Farewell, the poison used on both Bronn and Myrcella — got a taste of her own medicine when she was given Cersei’s goodbye kiss.Rodrik Cassel (Ron Donachie) The man who passes the sentence should swing the sword, Ned used to say — although he meant someone who was capable of doing so. During his siege of Winterfell, Theon Greyjoy completely botched the beheading of his former master-at-arms, needing several swings and then a kick to finish the job, while little Bran and Rickon Stark pleaded and wailed. “It was poignant,” Mr. Donachie said. “Rodrik had been responsible for Theon’s education. He’d been a friend to him, really.” Mr. Donachie said that he was quite relieved that the character portrayed by his son, Daniel Portman, had not yet suffered a similar fate. “Podrick’s still alive!” he said, laughing. “I was talking to Podrick the other day, and he’s doing quite well, thank you!”Myrcella Baratheon (Nell Tiger Free)Probably the best and the brightest of the Baratheon children, Myrcella was the only one of the three who figured out that their father was not King Robert, but their “uncle” Jaime Lannister. Unfortunately, as soon as she told Jaime that she was happy about this state of affairs, Ellaria Sand’s poison kicked in. “I initially found out at a costume fitting in Belfast,” Ms. Free said. “David Benioff walked past and said, ‘Hey, sorry, we kill you off, by the way!’ Which was very funny!”Tommen Baratheon (Dean-Charles Chapman)The sweet, sheltered Tommen was a king in title but still just a boy, ill-equipped to rule. When his mother, wife and brother-in-law were arrested by religious fanatics, he barricaded himself in his room and refused to eat, instead of, say, issuing a royal decree that rescinded the powers of the Faith Militant. When he realized that his own mother had blown up the Sept and everyone in it, Tommen’s response was to very calmly fall from a high window, removing himself from his mother’s chessboard. “I think the one thing I wanted to achieve was to make people shocked, stunned by the decision Tommen makes, not to see it coming,” Mr. Chapman said. “And from the tweets I’ve read, that was a lot of people’s reactions. That makes me proud of that scene.”Loras Tyrell (Finn Jones)The heir to Highgarden, Loras Tyrell was a pawn in Cersei Lannister’s machinations — arrested because he was gay, thrown into the dungeons to rot, forced to confess to a litany of crimes, made to renounce his land and title. Just when we thought Loras could suffer no more and must be past the worst of it, he and his sister, Margaery, were blown up in a blast of Cersei’s wildfire. “I was in Belfast, in my hotel room the night before the read-through,” Mr. Jones said. “I’d received all nine scripts of that season, and thought it was weird that I didn’t have the final episode. Then out of the blue, David [the “Game of Thrones” creator David Benioff] and Dan [creator Dan Weiss] called me. ‘So, Finn, it’s been a great six years, but the time has come … ’ ‘Nooooo!’ I cried out. ‘I was so close to the finishing line!’”Renly Baratheon (Gethin Anthony) “The night is dark and full of terrors,” Melisandre warned the younger brother of Stannis Baratheon. Renly expected to meet Stannis on the battlefield, not a magical dark vapor in his tent, which stabbed him in the heart. Mr. Anthony, who read ahead in the books, said he had been “well aware of Renly’s grisly demise,” and felt it had helped clarify what his approach should be. “It made the process feel more like a movie for me,” he said.Ros (Esmé Bianco)Never cross a Machiavellian mastermind. Ros, a prostitute-turned-madam-turned-spy, learned this the hard way when Littlefinger gave her to Joffrey to use as target practice for his new crossbow. Instead of showing Joffrey making his first kill, the camera panned to her trussed-up body during Littlefinger’s now-famous “chaos is a ladder” speech. “I was really infuriated that I didn’t get to die onscreen,” Ms. Bianco said, laughing. “I begged them, ‘Can’t I have a final cough and sputter?’ And they were like, ‘Nope, you’re dead.’ ‘Please?’ ‘Nope, you’re dead.’”Jeor Mormont (James Cosmo)The lord commander of the Night’s Watch was an honorable man who had the misfortune to lead some of the most dishonorable men in Westeros — convicted criminals looking for an easier way to serve their sentences. All it took was a cold night without enough food and an inhospitable host for his men to turn on him and stab him to death. “My fishing buddy was reading the books,” Mr. Cosmo said. “The first season, he said: ‘Wow. I’ve just finished Book 1. You’re still there. The old bear is still there.’ The next season, he said: ‘I’ve just finished Book 2. You’re still the Lord Commander.’ And then the third time we met, he said: ‘I’ve finished book three, James. They’re drinking beer out of your skull.’”Mance Rayder (Ciarán Hinds)You have to respect a man willing to die for his beliefs. Mance Rayder, the King Beyond the Wall, spent years uniting all the various clans of free folk in order to protect them from the coming onslaught of the army of the dead. He refused to undermine that effort, or to give his Wilding army to Stannis Baratheon to fight the Boltons, and for that, he was sentenced to burn at the stake. An arrow from Jon Snow stopped Mance’s suffering, and the Wildlings took up arms to fight the Boltons anyway — but lead by Jon, not Stannis.Osha (Natalia Tena)The Wildling woman who once threatened Bran Stark’s life became one of the fiercest protectors of the little lords, but she was no match for Ramsay Bolton. At least her death was relatively quick — stabbed, not flayed.Doran Martell (Alexander Siddig)Doran Martell, the ruling prince of Dorne, wanted to keep his country from going to war but was overruled by the warrior women in his family. They let him know their decision by assassinating him. On execution day, his last day on set, Mr. Siddig felt the temperature shift. “People weren’t rude or anything, but no one was as nice as they were before,” Mr. Siddig said. “No one really wants to chat with a condemned guy. What do you say? Awkward.” He opted not to read fan reaction. “Bad for the soul,” he said.Brynden Tully (Clive Russell)Catelyn Stark’s uncle, nicknamed the Blackfish, escaped the Red Wedding massacre by ducking out for a well-timed bathroom break. He returned to retake Riverrun from the Freys, which gave Sansa Stark and Brienne of Tarth a glimmer of hope that he could be a useful ally. But those hopes were short-lived when the Lannisters laid siege to Riverrun, he refused to surrender, and then was killed offscreen. Mr. Russell called it an “odd feeling” to read about his death, “as if I’d just read about my own ghastly and unavoidable demise,” which, he joked, was connected to his grief regarding “possible future employment.”Pycelle (Julian Glover) Pycelle seemed harmless, but the doddering old fool he pretended to be was an act. The Grand Maester broke the vows of his office repeatedly — betraying his king (when he convinced Aerys to open his gates to Tywin Lannister), helping kill Jon Arryn (when he allowed him succumb to poison instead of treating him) and sleeping with prostitutes. But Qyburn was right: Whatever Pycelle’s faults, he didn’t deserve to be forcibly retired by a mob of knife-wielding children. Mr. Glover almost didn’t participate in Pycelle’s final act because he was “fed up” and “bored” playing the character, but he agreed to come back for Season 6 when he read “that fantastic scene” — so long as he also got what he felt he deserved. “I said I would do it for two times the money,” Mr. Glover said. “And they came back ten minutes later and agreed.”Olly (Brenock O’Connor) Olly, the lone survivor of a Wildling raid, provided justification for anti-Wildling sentiment. But once he started to kill beloved characters, he transformed from an object of scorn rather than pity. “I assumed I’d be killed off when I returned for Season 6,” Mr. O’Connor said. “You don’t kill Jon Snow and get away with it.” Even though the actor agreed that Olly “deserved” to be hanged for his crime, it troubled him, he said, “to see how happy people were about the death of a child. Just a little.”Robert Baratheon (Mark Addy)King Robert was a great soldier, an inconsistent friend, a bad husband and a worse king. But he didn’t deserve to die in the underhanded manner concocted by his queen Cersei and her co-conspirator/cousin/lover, Lancel Lannister: drunk on wine, gored by a boar. It was a long, slow, painful death in which he regretted not having been a better father, named Ned Stark Protector of the Realm and rescinded his order to assassinate Daenerys Targaryen. The consequences were far-reaching — Ned’s execution, the War of the Five Kings, the deaths of his brothers Renly and Stannis, the cruel rule of King Joffrey, the impotent rule of King Tommen, the fall and ascension of his scheming widow. How many had to die to cover up Cersei’s crimes against the crown?Lancel Lannister (Eugene Simon)After becoming a penitent, Brother Lancel was brought down by a small child — and was the first to see the great green bloom of wildfire that destroyed the Sept. “There was a scene we shot on my last day that didn’t make the final cut,” Mr. Simon recalled. “The boy actually severs Lancel’s spine, that’s why he crawls. But the boy, the little murderer, wants to check, so he very slowly puts the entire knife into my left leg. It’s a really gruesome thing to watch a dummy version of your leg have a fake knife slide into it, but it’s also very cool.”The High Sparrow (Jonathan Pryce)“Hypocrisy is a boil,” the religious leader called the High Sparrow told Cersei upon their first meeting. “Lancing a boil is never pleasant.” While the High Sparrow did some good for the people of King’s Landing by ministering to the less fortunate, he also abused his powers and encouraged his fanatical followers to shame, abuse and torture their targets. Even at the end, his Sparrows refused to let people safely leave the building before Cersei’s wildfire vaporized them all.Alliser Thorne (Owen Teale) Alliser Thorne, the former master of arms promoted to First Ranger of Castle Black, was a thorn in Jon Snow’s side, taunting him throughout their time together at the Wall, during which they were meant to guard the realm of men against White Walkers but spent most of it fighting Wildlings. Snow’s move to save the Wildlings led to Thorne’s murderous mutiny against him. He got his comeuppance upon Snow’s resurrection, when the Lord Commander decided to execute the man who had executed him. “I knew something was up when I felt the rope around my neck,” Mr. Teale joked. Snow’s return, he said, was about the death of Death. “It causes us to imagine that perhaps Death really shall have no dominion.”The Waif (Faye Marsay)While training Arya Stark within at a religious assassin’s guild, a mysterious acolyte known as the Waif faced many frustrations — her student didn’t follow instructions or practice true self-abnegation. Then again, neither did the Waif. When she got permission to kill Arya, the Waif was told not to let her suffer. But the Waif had a personal vendetta and set about to do just that, stabbing her repeatedly in the stomach. A thrilling chase scene ensued, in which the Waif doggedly pursued her prey, only for Arya to lure her into the dark, where she had the advantage.Balon Greyjoy (Patrick Malahide)Of the “usurpers” named in Stannis’s blood-magic ritual with Melisandre, the king of the Iron Islands was the last to die. After arguing with his daughter about the foolhardiness of continuing with the invasion — which would require holding lands and castles against mainland armies — Balon Greyjoy threatened to reverse his decision to make her his heir and stormed outside. There, he met his long-lost brother, Euron, who came home to murder his way to the top. “Balon Greyjoy gets thrown off a bridge [in the books], so when they rang my agent asking if I had a head for heights, I knew the game was up,” Mr. Malahide said. He still has yet to watch not only his death scene, but any of the others. “I have never seen the show!” he said. “Typical Balon!”Tywin Lannister (Charles Dance)All Tyrion Lannister wanted was the love and respect of his formidable father. Unfortunately, Tywin wanted to kill him as a baby, paid men to rape Tyrion’s first wife, took credit for his efforts during the Battle of Blackwater, put him on trial for murder, sentenced him to die and then slept with his prostitute girlfriend. That last one earned Tywin a couple of crossbow bolts as Tyrion’s parting gift.Lysa Arryn (Kate Dickie)Catelyn Stark’s twisted sister murdered her own husband and helped start a war — all at the behest of the manipulative Littlefinger. She was even willing to execute Tyrion for a crime she had committed herself, and she threatened Sansa’s life because of a kiss. So when Littlefinger told Lysa he never loved her and pushed her out of the Moon Door, it seemed like a bit of poetic justice. “Most people seemed to be really happy that I was dead,” Ms. Dickie said. “People loved to hate Lysa. And she deserved to be hated.”Meryn Trant (Ian Beattie)Meryn Trant killed Arya’s sword-fighting instructor, Syrio Forel, and beat up Sansa and probably countless other little girls, so Arya’s revenge felt just. (A bit over the top, though.) She stabbed him in the eyes and in the chest and slit his throat. Mr. Beattie was one of the rare actors whose character was still alive in the books but doomed to die on the show, and this detail was slipped to him early on, by accident. “David [Benioff] had actually let it slip to me in Season 2 that Arya was going to kill me,” Mr. Beattie said. “When I walked on set on Season 2, he said: ‘You might have heard that you’re going to die this season. Well, you’re not. You are going to die [later], and Arya’s going to kill you.’” Mr. Beattie said he had been promised a spectacular death, “and they delivered.”Craster (Robert Pugh)This Wildling raped his own daughters, sacrificed his infant sons and went so far as to suggest that the ranging party of the Night’s Watch should kill their wounded. He took a certain malicious glee in treating them poorly, and he underestimated their violent criminality. When Karl Tanner called him a bastard, Craster drunkenly lunged at him with an ax and got a dagger in the throat for his troubles.Janos Slynt (Dominic Carter)The former commander of the City Watch, Janos Slynt was willing to do what he considered nasty but necessary work, from betraying Ned Stark and giving the order to kill Stark’s guardsmen to murdering King Robert’s bastard babies. But he wasn’t willing to take orders from Ned Stark’s son Jon Snow, and when Jon ordered him to assume command of Castle Greyguard, he openly defied him. It was with a certain satisfaction that we watched Jon exact a small measure of justice for Janos’s victims, as Janos revealed himself to be a sniveling coward once his head was on the chopping block. “The fan reaction I came across was lots of ‘We’re going to miss hating your character,’” Mr. Carter said.Kraznys mo Nakloz (Dan Hildebrand)“Dracarys.” With this High Valyrian word, Daenerys Targaryen ordered her dragon Drogon to incinerate Kraznys, the Astaporian slave-master who insulted her throughout their entire negotiation to buy 8,000 Unsullied soldiers. Mr. Hildebrand said that when he was on set: “A very nice man turned up and said, ‘So, we’re going to immolate you …’ I assumed he was part of the pyrotechnic crew.” He then realized it was the showrunner Dan Weiss. “I was deeply embarrassed that I didn’t recognize him,” he said.Stannis Baratheon (Stephen Dillane)Stannis was King Robert’s rightful heir, but in his effort to grab the throne with blood magic, he murdered his younger brother, Renly, and burned his daughter, Shireen, at the stake. When Brienne showed up to avenge Renly, Stannis had nothing left — his wife had committed suicide, half his troops had deserted him, and he had lost the battle with the Boltons. Losing his head was just a formality.Viserys Targaryen (Harry Lloyd)Viserys Targaryen thought he could buy an army by giving Khal Drogo his sister, Daenerys, as a wife. But he made the mistake of acting as if he were already a king. His death is an ironic one — he finally gets his heart’s desire, but the (molten) gold “crown” kills him. “I remember a funny chat with the director about what technically kills you when molten metal is poured over your skull,” Mr. Lloyd said. “We talked about the point when the liquid would penetrate the skull and touch the brain, the body temperature, the heart rate. But of course, when it came to it, I just screamed like a girl until they said cut.” The upshot of having a memorable death scene? “I am offered more blond parts than I used to be,” the brunette actor joked.Walder Frey (David Bradley)Revenge is best served with a side of Frey pie, and Arya Stark had the recipe. When she visited the man who hosted the murders of her brother and mother, she made sure to let him know that his sons weren’t missing — they were a part of his meal. And then, in an echo of how her mother Catelyn was killed, she slit Frey’s throat. All of this was prelude, of course, to Arya’s face-changing scheme in Season 7 to impersonate Lord Frey in order to toast the remaining men of his family with poisoned wine. The North remembers, indeed.Joffrey Baratheon (Jack Gleeson)Let’s face it — if Littlefinger and Olenna Tyrell, the status-seeking self-made man and the matriarch of one of the richest noble families, hadn’t conspired to poison Joffrey at his own wedding, he would be tormenting everyone in sight. It was a public service. But choking in the arms of his mother turned the little monster back into a little boy, and his suffering was needlessly prolonged.Roose Bolton (Michael McElhatton)Though he had been Robb Stark’s bannerman, Roose was the one who killed him at the Red Wedding by stabbing him in the heart. Roose’s death, at the hands of his own son, mirrored that kill, seeming to provide some justice. “I had a friend who was visiting on set that day,” Mr. McElhatton said: “and he reminded me, ‘Do you remember when the crew were told?’ Because they didn’t know I was doing to die. So the whole crew reaction when I was shooting my last scene was, ‘Oh my god, oh my god.’” Mr. McElhatton also skipped reading fan reactions. “Do they miss me?” he asked, chuckling.Ramsay Bolton (Iwan Rheon)The most terrible person appropriately had arguably the most terrible death. Ramsay — who castrated one poor captive for kicks, who hunted and raped women for sport, who gave his dogs a taste for human flesh — provided one last meal for his beloved pets, served up by Sansa, his abused wife. No wonder she smiled.Advertisement