https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/08/dining/wine-top-10-eric-asimov.html
A Top 10 Wine List Built on Memories - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2243
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovWhat does “the best” mean when talking about wine? Not the greatest, as the greatest wines in the world may not be the best wines for a specific occasion.What makes a wine the best has very much to do with the moment you choose to open the bottle. It’s not simply a question of quality, although that’s crucial. It’s a combination of the occasion, the people with whom you share it, the food you eat and the context. Ultimately, what counts are the memories.So this is not a “10 Best” list, but rather a tally of the most memorable wines I drank from 2016, bottles that were not only delicious but also lodged themselves in my synapses for reasons beyond simply what’s in the glass. They are both modest and profound, ranked roughly from youngest to oldest.1. Retsina may be among the most scorned wines in the world. It’s a traditional Greek white infused with the piquant flavor of pine resin. One of the first things wine novices learn is that retsina is awful. A trip to San Francisco early this year gave me an opportunity to rethink that bias.I had stopped for lunch at Souvla on Hayes Street, one of a small chain of fast-casual restaurants inspired by souvlaki joints in Greece that serve great spit-roasted meats. The menu offered a small group of Greek wines, including the promise, “Yes, we have (good) retsina.” So I had a glass.What a revelation! The retsina, a nonvintage Gaia Ritinitis Nobilis, was beautiful, bright and balanced with discernible piney highlights. It was absolutely delicious with my smoky, charred lamb and salad.Later, I reflected on how easy it is to dismiss centuries-old traditions like retsina if they don’t fit modern sensibilities. Yet in the context of Souvla, this retsina was the best possible wine to drink. A month or so later, a sommelier at Betony in Manhattan served me a glass of this wine blind. I knew what it was, and it went pretty well in the context of the restaurant’s modern American cuisine, too.2. Looking for a modest wine with a sushi lunch at Blue Ribbon Sushi Bar and Grill in Manhattan, I ordered a 2014 Bouzeron from Domaine A. & P. de Villaine. It’s a white Burgundy, but it’s made of the aligoté grape, which is often as reflexively despised as retsina. Yet this wine was superb — savory with surprising richness — and went beautifully with the meal. It set me off on a study of aligoté, which continues to yield surprising results.3. Almost 4,300 feet up in the northern foothills of Mount Etna lies perhaps the highest vineyard in Sicily, Salvo Foti’s Vigna Bosco. It’s too high for nerello mascalese, the signature red grape of Etna, so farmers more than 100 years ago planted grenache, alicante bouschet, minella bianca and others that Mr. Foti has not identified, all in a small, walled vineyard.Mr. Foti acquired Vigna Bosco about 15 years ago, and he has nurtured these ungrafted vines as a cultural relic of the time when farmers trekked for miles with their mules to work in the vineyard for a few days.He blends the grapes into a gorgeous rosé that is earthy, savory and pure, and that tastes as if it has a long and colorful past. Sipping the wine with Mr. Foti in Quattro Archi, a delightful osteria in the town of Milo, it was easy to imagine the days not so long ago when arduous farming, not tourism, was the primary work of Etna.4. A decade ago, the Jura was as little known a wine region as there was in France. The reds were considered too pale, the whites too oxidative and the place too isolated. Now, the Jura is fashionable among cutting-edge wine destinations around the world. Certain producers there have cult followings, their bottles as highly allocated as the rarest Burgundies.I got my hands on one of those bottles, a 2014 Arbois Pupillin ploussard from Houillon-Overnoy, a red as pale as a dark rosé, made without sulfur dioxide, the stabilizer that is used almost universally in the wine industry.I knew this bottle was very young, but I couldn’t resist and opened it with friends at a restaurant in Midtown Manhattan. Breathing it in was like inhaling the freshest possible spiced red fruit. Drinking it was like crunching into that fruit. The purity was breathtaking, the wine beautiful, the time right.5. On a weekend trip to Montreal for a dear friend’s bachelor party in October, I stopped for lunch at L’Express, a venerable bistro on the Rue St.-Denis. What struck us immediately were the wine list’s prices, which seemed much cheaper than in New York. One in particular was a 2013 Meursault Vireuils, a village wine from Domaine Roulot, one of Burgundy’s best white wine producers.Though it often sells in New York restaurants for $250 to $300 a bottle, L’Express had it for the Canadian equivalent of $98. We leapt on it, and it was a welcome reminder of the beauty of white Burgundy and of Meursault.The wine was rich and minerally, yet energetic and incisive. It was delicious on its own, and even better with trout. It was more than we had planned to spend for a lunch wine, but, faced with a steal, we couldn’t let it get away.6. I love Napa Valley cabernet sauvignon, though I don’t find the dominant style of opulent, powerfully fruity wines to be particularly interesting. I prefer the freshness, complexity and age-worthiness that you can still find in some Napa cabernets if you look for them, so I have been intrigued by Francis Ford Coppola’s long-term plan to both reconstitute the historic Inglenook estate and recalibrate its flagship wine, Rubicon, toward elegance and balance.I was especially interested after Mr. Coppola hired Philippe Bascaules, who spent 20 years at Château Margaux in Bordeaux, as general manager. Over dinner at Inglenook last spring, we drank some recent vintages of Rubicon, and I fell in love with the 2013, a dense wine, yet fresh and vibrant, earthy and spicy, but with great finesse. This was my kind of Napa cabernet.Mr. Bascaules has since returned to Margaux, taking over as managing director after the death of Paul Pontallier, the longtime manager there. He set Inglenook on a great course, and he will continue to oversee it from afar.7. In March, coincidentally just a week before Mr. Pontallier died, I spent a weekend in Atlanta, where I tasted 24 vintages of Château Margaux. It remains a fitting tribute to his life’s work there.The 1996 was his favorite vintage of his tenure, he once told me, and in Atlanta it was gorgeous. It was dark and pure, graceful with an almost gossamer structure, perfumed with that sort of lead-pencil, cigar-box aroma that Mr. Pontallier a few years ago told me epitomized Margaux. It was complex and vibrant, though still young. I think Mr. Pontallier would have been very proud of this wine that day.8. Domaine Armand Rousseau is one of the greatest red wine producers of Burgundy, renowned for its Gevrey-Chambertin. I was privileged in May to attend a lunch at the Nantucket Wine Festival where we drank a dozen Rousseaus.Of the wines, the one that stayed with me the most was the 1996 Chambertin-Clos de Bèze. This grand cru captured the moment when a great wine begins the transition from its primary state, dominated by exuberant flavors of fresh fruit and flowers, to a secondary phase in which the fruit is beginning to give way to earthy, woodsy flavors. Yet this wine had lost none of the energy of its youth. It was still vibrant, vigorous and graceful, with the intensity and finesse you would expect of a great Burgundy.9. White Bordeaux is one of the great forgotten wines of today. One reason, possibly, is that while many mediocre white Bordeaux are easy to find, the truly superb wines are rare and expensive. I had one of the best, rarest and most expensive at a dinner, also on Nantucket, featuring top Bordeaux wines.It was a 1990 Château Haut-Brion Blanc, from one of the most historic producers in the Bordeaux region, and it may have been the best white Bordeaux I’ve ever had. You can’t describe this wine in terms of fruit. The ’90s aromas and flavors were more waxy, like lanolin, and floral, like honeysuckle, with a spine of profound minerality. It was a jaw-dropping combination, with the sort of texture that makes you want to keep drinking so the experience won’t end.10. Great wine stirs the emotions. I am particularly susceptible to wines that coincide with historical moments, either personal, like 1929, when my father was born, or global, like 1964, a year suffused with turning points in civil rights, war and popular culture. To drink a great wine, made from grapes that shimmered those dewy mornings in ’64 is, for me, a penetrating thing.I was a small boy then. Fifty-two years later and feeling old, I was drinking 14 Barolos from the ’64 vintage at Maialino, a restaurant facing Gramercy Park, in November. One wine stood above the rest, the ’64 Barolo from Cantina Mascarello, an estate run by a father, Giulio Mascarello, who would hand it down to his son, Bartolo, who in turn would hand it to his daughter, Maria Teresa.The wine was pale, yet fresh, deep and soulful, younger than its years with miles to go. It was not just a survivor but a thriver, and it sent a message that I needed to hear.EMAIL: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @Eric Asimov.Advertisement