https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/books/review-table-manners-chef-jeremiah-tower.html
Review: ‘Table Manners,’ Chef Jeremiah Tower’s Guide for All Dining Challenges - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2022
AdvertisementSupported byBooks of The TimesBy Dwight GarnerWe no-nonsense Americans have long sneered at fussy Old World etiquette. One senator’s account of a meal with George Washington during his presidency included this observation: “At every interval of eating or drinking he played on the table with a fork or knife, like a drumstick.”Yet we understand why civility and courtesy matter. As Arthur M. Schlesinger wrote in his study of advice books, “Learning How to Behave” (1946), “Even the outward motions imply a certain kindliness and consideration for others.” Mr. Schlesinger added that manners don’t “complicate social life as much as they simplify it.” Good manners aren’t snobby but egalitarian. They’re free to all.Jeremiah Tower, the author of “Table Manners: How to Behave in the Modern World and Why Bother,” is not the first person you would expect to deliver a book about decorum. In the 1970s, when he was the co-owner (alongside Alice Waters) and executive chef of Chez Panisse, the venerable restaurant in Berkeley, Calif., he was the food world’s best-known libertine, snorting cocaine in the kitchen while imbibing magnums of Sauternes.In his indispensable history of modern American cuisine, “The United States of Arugula” (2006), David Kamp described the “Caligulan” atmosphere in Mr. Tower’s kitchen, as well as the “Fleetwood Mac-like carnival of sexual entanglings” in which he was lead satyr. Then again, who ever said having good manners meant you could not know glee?Mr. Tower’s new primer is a small book that, like most etiquette volumes, delivers a great deal of advice so obvious as to be numbing. Be clean; be polite; when in doubt, such as when confronted by unknowns (finger bowls, artichokes, fish knives), watch what others do; follow the Golden Rule.Mr. Tower gets off to a bad start when, in his introduction, he tries to give the Golden Rule an upgrade. He refers to “the Platinum Rule: do unto others as they would have you do.” This coinage must be rubbed out before it spreads. Perhaps we can call upon that savviest of Bond villains, Platinumfinger.The author soon finds his footing (though he loses it again, as we shall see, when talking about cellphone etiquette), and “Table Manners” becomes an amiable and frequently witty guide to dining room etiquette as it stands in the waning days of the Obama era.Mr. Tower attends to reality by admitting that “the train of the old rule about never putting your elbows on the table left the station a long time ago: as long as you aren’t eating while you put them there, and as long as the host is occasionally doing the same thing.”He drops a precision strike on so-called palate-cleansing courses, like sorbets: “All that untimely ice is a vicious attack on one’s palate and a fraudulent attempt to put class into a meal. Just serving it shows that you don’t know what you are doing.”Mr. Tower writes particularly well about that most essential ingredient at a dinner party: the conversation. Never deliver a medical monologue, or as he puts it, “leave the organ recitals for the concert hall.” He reminds us that “place-dropping is as bad as name-dropping.”I like his strictures about sex talk: “Sex is an acceptable subject when it is about other people, kind, funny, and spoken of with an air of astonishment.”He regards bringing up news headlines at the table as, at best, a junior-varsity-level move: “Everyone has seen the story at least three times that day on one media form or another. So, to be captivating, it had better be an approaching hurricane, a just-in presidential election result, or a declaration of war.”“Table Manners” includes a section, titled “Techniquette,” about cellphone behavior. I find Mr. Tower’s advice here to be diabolically perverse, a platinum thumb up the nose of the rule formerly known as golden. “Go ahead and text” at the table, he writes, though he warns this might exclude others around you.He says that using a speakerphone at the table is O.K. if you “keep it down.” This is heretical. He writes: “As for taking pictures of every dish, if they can be done quickly, without disrupting the service and without annoying the other guests, go for it.” Is that rumbling sound the opening of the Seventh Seal?Your cellphone is O.K. on the table, he writes, if its screen is facing down. I am experiencing outrage fatigue. The best cellphone maneuver I’ve heard about — it is supposedly seen at some restaurants in Silicon Valley — is as follows: Before ordering, everyone places his or her cellphone in a pile at the center of the table. The first person to retrieve a phone must pick up the tab.Mr. Tower frowns on hosts who, to freshen conversation, “ask everyone to switch seats between courses.” Yes, that’s overkill. But I’d argue (he doesn’t) that with a group of eight or more, having one person from each end of the table switch places before dessert is usually a welcome tweak to the evening.The best thing about Mr. Tower’s book is that it is driven by his interest in pleasure — his and ours. This word to wine snobs is typical of his advice here: “Please don’t bring up the old rag about cocktails destroying one’s palate. So does toothpaste, but a Negroni is a lot more fun.”Because of an editing error, the Books of The Times review on Wednesday about “Table Manners: How to Behave in the Modern World and Why Bother,” by Jeremiah Tower, misidentified the author of another book about etiquette, “Learning How to Behave.” He was Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr., not Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.Follow Dwight Garner on Twitter: @DwightGarnerTable Manners: How to Behave in the Modern World and Why BotherBy Jeremiah TowerIllustrated. 148 pages. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. $20.Advertisement