http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/us/politics/william-weld-libertarian.html
What Does Weld Say? Real-Time Reaction From a Libertarian - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2647
AdvertisementSupported byJoining us live during tonight’s debate was William Weld, the Libertarian Party’s vice-presidential nominee and a former two-term Republican governor of Massachusetts.He chatted with us via emails while watching the debate between Donald J. Trump and Hillary Clinton from his home in Canton, Mass. (Check out how we covered the debate in real time: live video and analysis, fact checks and highlights.)Mr. Weld mounted an unsuccessful challenge to Senator John Kerry in 1996. A year later, Mr. Weld resigned as governor after President Bill Clinton nominated him to be ambassador to Mexico. Senate Republicans held up the nomination, and Mr. Weld withdrew.Mr. Weld — a novelist and Harvard-trained classicist who traces his family to the pilgrims and who was once related by marriage to Theodore Roosevelt — has had an eventful career in private business and politics over the past 20 years. That included an unsuccessful run for governor in New York. Over some opposition from libertarians, he won a spot on the Libertarian ticket with Gary Johnson, the party’s presidential nominee, in May.____JASON HOROWITZ, 8:39 P.M. EASTERN: Welcome Governor Bill Weld to the second presidential debate, polling threshold be damned! You are joining us from your home in Canton, Mass. What paintings and books are around you? What chair are you sitting on? What computer are you typing on and what do you think the debates have missed without having you there? (Until this point, that is.)WILLIAM WELD, 8:39: Leslie [Leslie Marshall, Mr. Weld’s wife] and I are sitting on a sofa in the downstairs TV room, books include “Justice” by Mariana Cook, “A Girl Could Stand Up” by Leslie, paintings are a Jack Gray — oil of an oysterman in Maine and a Robin Hill of a pair of red-tailed hawks. I’m typing on my laptop, which is a Lenovo. The previous debates have missed having a centrist point of view advanced — that is, fiscally responsible and socially inclusive. That would be us, Gary Johnson and Bill Weld, two two-term Republican governors in blue States (New Mexico and Massachusetts).Here’s how we analyzed in real time the second presidential debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump.____HOROWITZ, 8:47: You told the Boston Globe recently that, while you have significant policy differences with Hillary Clinton and you are committed to your Libertarian ticket, your “full attention” would be on criticizing Donald Trump because his agenda is “in a class by itself.” (You did not mean a good class!) And this was before Mr. Trump’s now infamous vulgar remarks became public, and before he held a pre-debate press conference, a little more than an hour ago, with various women who have accused President Bill Clinton of sexual abuse.First, do you have any reaction to Mr. Trump’s event tonight, and second, if you were on that stage tonight, what would your mission be?WELD, 8:47: Donald Trump focusing on Bill Clinton and women is self-defeating to the point of being politically suicidal. Bill Clinton is not on the ballot. This is Donald Trump versus his own words; no one else is in the ring. Whenever Donald Trump is talking about women as sex objects, he is losing.If I were on the stage, I would be inviting Republican-leaning voters to vote for our Libertarian ticket, which consists of two two-term Republican governors who succeeded in bringing fiscal discipline to our states.____HOROWITZ, 9:05: On the stump, you’ve framed both establishment parties as relics that no longer speak to the people. (“And this year the Libertarian Party is going to be the comet that takes out the dinosaurs!”) Have things reached a point with Mr. Trump where that sort of plague-on-both-their-houses approach is dangerous? (Gary Johnson, your running mate, told The Wall Street Journal, “That may be Bill’s focus. I guess my focus would be blocking Hillary Clinton, and that between the two of us, we are in it to win it.”) Do you feel you should make sure people understand there is a difference here? That one is better than the other?WELD, 9:05: I have said since the outset of our campaign that I believe Hillary Clinton is qualified to be president of the United States and that I believe Donald Trump is not.Reporters for The New York Times fact-checked the statements made by Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump during Sunday’s presidential debate.____HOROWITZ, 9:08: In the 1970s, you worked alongside Clinton, then Hillary Rodham, on the House Judiciary Committee’s Nixon impeachment inquiry staff. My understanding is that you guys were friends. What would you be watching for, worried about with her as an opponent on stage?WELD, 9:08: I would look for HRC to try to get under DJT’s skin by hitting him with short quotes from his own language, using quotation marks, to make them impossible to deny.____HOROWITZ, 9:13: What do you think of Hillary Clinton’s apparent decision not to shake Donald Trump’s hand?WELD, 9:13: Understandable.____HOROWITZ, 9:17: Do you think Mr. Trump is being effective in trying to pivot from his “locker room talk” (“I don’t think you understood what was said”) to knocking the hell out of ISIS, will work? How would you keep him on that point?:WELD, 9:17: Trump is still sniffing loudly. He’s either had a cold for a long time, or he’s taking something that makes him sniff.People will get that ISIS was a non sequitur, but at least he wasn’t snarling.____HOROWITZ, 9:22: She seems to be saying he is not fit to be president. Is this unprecedented? Necessary?WELD, 9:22: Of course she is saying that. I said that too, as did many others. It is the case.____HOROWITZ, 9:36: Trump said, “I hate to say it, if I win, I am going to instruct my attorney general to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation.” And he just suggested that Hillary Clinton will end up “in jail.”You are somebody who was known for strong relationships on both sides of the aisle, what does this language do to the political climate going forward? Is this a different world now? How so?WELD, 9:36: If Gary Johnson or I were present at this debate, we would argue that the election of either the R or the D candidate would be unlikely to dispel the poisonous atmosphere in Washington, whereas a Libertarian administration might not appear so “threatening” to either party, particularly given our relatively low-key approach and history of working across the aisle.Naturally, threatening to jail the opposing candidate makes it even worse.____HOROWITZ, 9:39: It seems like Mr. Trump is clinging to the email situation, and Mrs. Clinton seems uncomfortable and bothered by him. Is she losing her cool there, talking about his campaign imploding, or was that a good moment for her and why?WELD, 9:39: My take is that DJT is starting to interrupt too much. I think she’s keeping her balance.____HOROWITZ, 9:53: Did you complain much to moderators during debates? Why do you think Trump does this so much? Again, if you were up there, what would you say when he did this?WELD, 9:53: Trump reflexively tries to bully anyone who seems to the counterparty in any way.____HOROWITZ, 10:03:  What did you make of Mr. Trump saying Mrs. Clinton should go first because he was a “gentleman.” (By the way, did you ever meet him in New York? When? Where?) And since they have finally gotten to substance, what would you do with Obamacare?WELD, 10:03: I would tweak Obamacare to make it work better — more market mechanisms, greater role for doctors and patients, narrow the individual mandate.I met DJT a few times socially in New York, with his wife. He can be a gentleman in social situations, and even generous in personal matters. In business, however, his reputation in New York is otherwise.Mr. Johnson will be the first third-party presidential candidate in 20 years to appear on the ballot in all 50 states. But he is rarely recognized as he hustles through airport taxi lines, wheeling his own luggage.____HOROWITZ, 10:08:  Trump just said, “Late, great Abraham Lincoln!” Have you ever heard that construction before?WELD, 10:08: No. HRC is vulnerable on both the “public and private position” and the “people in the industry know what regulation is best” quotes. She skated on this, by quoting Honest Abe. DJT missed a chance to land a punch here.____HOROWITZ, 10:09:  You successfully brought taxes down as governor of Massachusetts. Whose tax plan makes more sense to you, and what does it mean to you that Mr. Trump has not released his tax returns?WELD, 10:09:  Advantage Trump on tax plans, though his is not detailed. Yes of course he should make his tax returns public. (Two years of mine will be out next week.)____HOROWITZ, 10:15:  O.K., as someone who studied the classics and knows his way around an argument, what historical antecedents come to mind?WELD, 10:15:  Hamilton and Burr come to mind. Burr raised an army in the West and should have been prosecuted for treason. Trump is Burr, who raised an army in Tennessee, very possibly to march on Washington.____HOROWITZ, 10:25:  Now that they talked about Aleppo and Mr. Trump disagreeing with his running mate Mike Pence on Russia — should there be room to disagree with a running mate? You do on various issues. Also, from what you are hearing from Trump right now about Syria and sneak attacks, how does that stack up against your running mate when asked about Aleppo?WELD, 10:25:  Gary and I are old friends and good friends, and plan to govern as a team if elected. We agree on the basic outlines of a libertarian approach to government, though we differ on some issues and some details, and are open about the fact that we will discuss them openly — though at the end of the day, there is and will be only one president.HOROWITZ, 10:25:  What do you think our policy should be? And how much of a priority is the Syrian situation for the country?WELD, 10:25:  Clinton’s “no fly zone” for Syria risks war. Our policy would have been more restrained than hers. Trump is actually scoring some points re Libya and Syria. Trump is scoring points regarding Aleppo and Mosul.Half of the population of rebel-held Aleppo have said they will leave if there is a path. I am afraid that Assad is going to take the territory.My priority now would be to prevent further slaughter of innocents in Aleppo.____HOROWITZ, 10:28:  Trump just said “She has tremendous hate in her heart.” You know her, what do you think?WELD, 10:28:  I think she is a good person and an idealistic person. So, hate in her heart? No.____HOROWITZ, 10:38:  You’ve said you think the party will split either this or next election. Is this the crackup, with all these Republicans rescinding their endorsements? Have they come to their senses, or are you worried that what comes after Trump will be someone who appeals to what you have called the Trump Party — “the Know-Nothing Party” you have called them, “based on hatred of immigrants and conspiracy theories and violent rallies.” Is the problem, as you see it, Trump or the people he is appealing to?WELD, 10:38:  The problem is Trump, not the people he is appealing to. We simply need to do a great deal more to provide for and help those people through our educational system (teach to the job, not teach to the test), worker retraining, worker resettlement, and introduction of new and necessary industries in geographic areas that have been hard hit on the jobs front. It is Mr. Trump who has set out to stir up envy, resentment, and even rage — not workers who have lost their jobs.____HOROWITZ, 10:46: What do you think are their positive attributes? For both!WELD, 10:46: Trump has a wide-ranging, unorthodox and curious intellect, and certainly thinks for himself!Mrs. Clinton is a high quality person, and possesses great ability.____HOROWITZ, 11:01: So, who won?WELD, 11:01: Trump held it together, except for being almost unbelievably rude, so that qualifies as outperforming expectations. Not sure that means he “won” the debate, however — with his “Bill Clinton and women” gambit, he may have a rough morning tomorrow.(Mrs. Clinton also held it together, of course, it’s just that that’s not news.)____HOROWITZ, 11:01: Last question. In 1997, you withdrew your name to be the Clinton administration’s ambassador to Mexico, after Republicans in the Senate held it up. If Hillary wins and is the next president, would you accept another appointment as ambassador somewhere? Where?WELD, 11:01:  I don’t think ambassador is in my future, no.Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.Advertisement