https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/01/crosswords/yes-you-can-write-more-than-one-letter-in-a-square.html
Yes, You Can Write More Than One Letter in a Square - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2362
AdvertisementSupported byWordplayBy Deb AmlenSPECIAL POST — Some solvers love them, some solvers hate them, but rebus elements are a fact of life when it comes to solving crosswords.Readers who are just starting to solve ask different questions when there is a rebus in a puzzle:Wait, what? You’re allowed to put more than one letter or word in a square? Yes. Yes, you are. But only when the puzzle calls for it. You can’t just do it randomly. Aren’t we supposed to be warned when a rebus exists in the puzzle? No, that’s part of the fun of solving.If more than one rebus exists in a square — and why do you do this to us? — is there a way to predict the order in which the rebus elements are supposed to be entered? Yes, there is. The Across entry is entered first, and then the Down entry. We give examples below.How am I supposed to put more than one letter or word in a square if I am solving online or on my device? Keep reading. We explain that in the last section.A rebus can be a letter, number or symbol that represents a word, but in many crosswords, the rebus will be a word or group of letters that need to be written inside a single square.You’ll find two kinds of letter-based rebus elements in a crossword.The first is where the rebus entry reads the same for both the intersecting Across and Down entries, like this puzzle by Elizabeth Long from December 1, 2011, where the word JACK was the rebus element.In this case, the following rebus answers would be accepted:JACKJ (The first letter)The second type is where the rebus entry reads differently for the intersecting Across and Down entries. In the May 18, 2017 puzzle by Jacob Stulberg, two different words belong in the same square.In Mr. Stulberg’s puzzle, the Across rebus element is CHICKEN and the Down rebus element is ROAD, as in the classic CHICKEN crossing the ROAD joke. In the case of a double rebus, the following entries would be accepted:CHICKEN/ROADC/R (The first letters of the two words)Step 1: Select the square in which you want to enter a rebus. Click the Rebus button on the toolbar above the clue lists, or simply press Escape (Esc). This will open an expandable square in which you can type multiple characters.Step 2: Type in your answer and press Enter/Return, or click anywhere outside the field to close and save your rebus. To cancel your entry instead, press Escape.Step 1: Click on the square in which you want to enter the rebus. Tap the “More” key on the bottom left-hand side of the screen.Step 2: Tap the “Rebus” key. This will open up a larger square in which you can type multiple letters.Step 3: Type in the letters and then tap anywhere inside the grid to close and save your rebus.The process for entering a rebus on an Android device is the same as for the iOS process, except that on the Android app, the Ellipsis key [ ... ] on the lower left-hand side is used. Tap the Ellipsis key and then locate the Rebus key. Follow the instructions for entering the Rebus element on an iOS device.Now that you have the hang of this crossword feature, give one of our free Mini puzzles a try.Happy solving!Advertisement