https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/19/books/review/tommy-orange-there-there.html
Yes, Tommy Orange’s New Novel Really Is That Good - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2185
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Colm ToibinTHERE THEREBy Tommy Orange288pp. Knopf $25.95.(This book was selected as one of The New York Times Book Review’s 10 Best Books of 2018. For the rest of the list, click here.)In George R. Stewart’s “Names on the Land: A Historical Account of Place-Naming in the United States,” there is a single mention of Oakland, Calif.: “Across the bay from San Francisco was a stretch of flat land scattered with magnificent California live oaks. In Mexican times it had been known as Encinal del Temescal, ‘oak-grove of the sweat-house.’ The Americans who planned a town there may not have known Spanish, but they could see the trees. In simple description they called it Oakland.”In Tommy Orange’s “There There,” an ambitious meditation on identity and its broken alternatives, on myth filtered through the lens of time and poverty and urban life, on tradition all the more pressing because of its fragility, it is as if he seeks to reconfigure Oakland as a locus of desire and dreams, to remake the city in the likeness of his large and fascinating set of characters.The title of his book comes from Gertrude Stein — who, one of the book’s characters discovers, “found that she was talking about how the place where she’d grown up in Oakland had changed so much, that so much development had happened there, that the there of her childhood, the there there, was gone, there was no there there anymore.”In this big, noisy novel filled with absences, stray clues, odd traces, Orange has managed to fix his attention fiercely on Oakland as a place of pure stability. “I feel bad sometimes even saying I’m Native,” one of the characters says. “Mostly I just feel I’m from Oakland.” Toward the end of the book one of the characters “is the fire and the dance and the night,” but in the next sentence “he’s standing in front of a BART map.”Orange makes Oakland into a “there” that becomes all the more concretely, emphatically and fully so in a novel that deals, in tones that are sweeping and subtle, large-gestured and nuanced, with what the notion of belonging means for Native Americans.[ Read our profile of Tommy Orange ]In an eloquent prologue, Orange writes of the relationship between Native Americans and the city: “Plenty of us came by choice, to start over, or to make money, or for a new experience. Some of us came to cities to escape the reservation. … The quiet of the reservation, the side-of-the-highway towns, rural communities, that kind of silence just makes the sound of your brain on fire that much more pronounced.”The idea of unsettlement and ambiguity, of being caught between two worlds, of living a life that is disfigured by loss and the memory of loss, but also by confusion, distraction and unease, impels some of the characters, and allows the sound of the brain on fire to become dense with dissonance. Orange’s characters are, however, also nourished by the ordinary possibilities of the present, by common desires and feelings. This mixture gives their experience, when it is put under pressure, depth and a sort of richness.Orange is fully alert to the possibilities that the pure lack of nostalgia, which he rigorously insists on, will offer his novel. He relishes the paradoxes his characters inhabit and embody. “We are the memories we don’t remember,” he writes. “We know the sound of the freeway better than we do rivers.”Jacquie Red Feather, when she has checked into a hotel after a flight, for example, ponders on the meaning of home, remembers how her mother spoke about “getting back home to Oklahoma. But home for Jacquie and her sister was a locked station wagon in an empty parking lot. Home was a long ride on a bus. Home was the three of them anywhere safe for the night.”Orange uses the word “Indianing” as though it were a choice, and something you have to be grown up to do, “like drinking or driving or smoking or voting.” His character Orvil Red Feather discovers the word “pretendian” online, and later invokes the idea of “Indians dressed up as Indians.”Orvil looks in the bedroom mirror “with his regalia on all wrong. It isn’t backward, and actually he didn’t know what he did wrong, but it’s off. He moves in front of the mirror and his feathers shake. He catches the hesitation, the worry in his eyes, there in the mirror.” He knows that the woman who cares for him would disapprove if she saw him. He is deeply unsure of himself: “He’s waiting for something true to appear before him — about him. It’s important that he dress like an Indian, dance like an Indian, even if it is an act, even if he feels like a fraud the whole time, because the only way to be Indian in this world is to look and act like an Indian.”This idea of inauthenticity adds to the delicate drama of the book, makes Orvil’s sense that he is “part of something” all the more poignant and credible, all the more dramatic and engaging.No one in the novel is fully sure how to look or act, how to live or be. It is as though Orange has taken Orvil’s broken, shadowy heritage and made it not only persistent and pressing, but also offers it as a way of enriching Orvil as a character, someone more fully present and “there” because of the very battle going on in his being between absences and a shivering trace of something that comes sharply from the past.Orvil, like most of the characters here, is what Orange calls in an interlude “a present-tense” person. And in this present tense, no one is pure. One of the characters ponders on the mixture of conquered and conquering in his own actual body: “You’re from a people who took and took and took and took. And from a people taken. You were both and neither. When you took baths, you’d stare at your brown arms against your white legs in the water and wonder what they were doing together on the same body, in the same bathtub.”Within the cacophony of voices in this book and the many short chapters each told from the perspective of one of the characters, the structure is not only dictated by the sense of identity these characters share, but by the fact that many of them will meet at a great powwow to be held in Oakland. Thus they are all, as in Chaucer, pilgrims on their way to a shrine, or, as in Faulkner’s “As I Lay Dying,” an extended family crossing the landscape.Each wants something different as he or she travels to the powwow, from the high-minded to the poignant to the confused to the criminal.The novel, then, is their picaresque journey, allowing for moments of pure soaring beauty to hit against the most mundane, for a sense of timelessness to be placed right beside a cleareyed version of the here and now, for a sense of vast dispossession to live beside day-to-day misery and poverty. Nothing in Orange’s world is simple, least of all his characters and his sense of the relationship between history and the present. Instead, a great deal is subtle and uncertain in this original and complex novel.Colm Toibin’s most recent novel is “House of Names.”Advertisement