https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/nyregion/fight-for-same-sex-marriage-was-one-that-gained-momentum-in-new-york.html
A Victory for Same-Sex Marriage, With Roots in New York - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2429
AdvertisementSupported byAbout New YorkBy Jim DwyerFriday morning, sitting in her apartment on lower Fifth Avenue, Edith Windsor was dialed into a conference room at a Midtown Manhattan law firm to hear the news that Supreme Court had decided that people of the same sex were entitled to marry.A petite, elegant Greenwich Village widow who turned 86 last week, Ms. Windsor was a dynamic force in a legal and social avalanche that gathered power in New York and has changed the country.“She wept,” her lawyer, Roberta A. Kaplan said.Two years ago this Friday, the United States Supreme Court ruled that Ms. Windsor was entitled to the same estate tax benefits as any other person who had lost a spouse. It didn’t matter, the court found, that Ms. Windsor’s spouse was another woman, Thea Spyer.The court did not legalize same-sex marriage, but it said that the federal government could not deny what New York and a few other states had decided.“The laws of New York came to acknowledge the urgency of this issue for same-sex couples who wanted to affirm their commitment,” Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote for the majority in 2013. “New York acted to enlarge the definition of marriage to correct what its citizens and elected representatives perceived to be an injustice that they had not earlier known or understood.”At that moment in 2013, Justice Kennedy was not yet ready for the ruling and opinion that he issued Friday on behalf of the court, Ms. Kaplan said.But the trajectory of change was steep, and its velocity was rising. The opinion he issued Friday was, Ms. Kaplan said, “a beautiful and powerful explanation of why the Constitution exists, the courts exist, and why all people in our nation need to be afforded equal respect, dignity and liberty under the law.”People have spoken about same-sex marriage for decades, but there was neither political will nor popular sentiment for it until recently.Four years ago this week, on June 24, 2011, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo signed a new law that recognized same-sex marriage in New York State, after Mr. Cuomo steered the bill through the Legislature.Before New York passed its law, only five states had recognized same-sex marriage, and it had been two years since the most recent of them — New Hampshire — had acted. The issue was stalled. Then New York joined the list, the sixth and by far the largest state, instantly doubling the number of people covered by equality laws.More states followed. Two years later, when Ms. Windsor’s case was decided, 12 states allowed same-sex couples to marry.“Today, it’s 37,” said Ms. Kaplan, who argued the case for Ms. Windsor. “There have been 58 court decisions allowing marriage to gay people relying on Windsor. There have been three courts that ruled the other way.”Internationally, voters in Ireland last month recognized same-sex marriage through a national referendum, the first country to do so. If the pace of change seems astounding, it is a matter of the law catching up with life as actually lived. A legal ruling can uphold a national health care act, as happened on Thursday, but judges don’t make social history.It was on a Friday night in 1963, at the Portofino restaurant in Greenwich Village, that Ms. Windsor spotted Ms. Spyer. They danced until Ms. Windsor wore holes through her stockings. They bought homes together. Ms. Spyer gave Ms. Windsor an engagement brooch in 1967. Because the law was not ready for them, they married each other in all the day-to-day ways that matter. When Ms. Spyer, a psychologist, got multiple sclerosis, Ms. Windsor, an early computer programmer, quit her job to care for her. They loaded Ms. Spyer’s wheelchair into a van for a trip to Ontario, where they legally married in 2007. They were still at it, the fine grain of love raised by the needs of their aging bodies, when Ms. Spyer died in 2009.To obtain the estate tax benefits that widowed people get when their spouses die, Ms. Windsor went to court to challenge the Defense of Marriage Act, a law Bill Clinton signed in 1996 while campaigning for re-election. It excluded people in same-sex marriages from those and other benefits.Justice Kennedy wrote in 2013: “It seems fair to conclude that, until recent years, many citizens had not even considered the possibility that two persons of the same sex might aspire to occupy the same status and dignity as that of a man and woman in lawful marriage.”After the Supreme Court ruled that the Defense of Marriage Act was unconstitutional, the State of New York and the Internal Revenue Service had to give back about $638,000 in taxes collected from Ms. Spyer’s estate. (Plus interest.)That was not a trivial outcome or sum for Ms. Windsor.Ms. Kaplan recently argued against a same-sex marriage ban in Mississippi before a federal judge, Carlton Reeves, who was not interested in claims by the state that things were moving too quickly. It was not until 1970, Judge Reeves said, when he was a first grader in the Mississippi Delta, that his school was integrated. Segregation had been outlawed by the Supreme Court long before, in 1954. “He said, ‘In my opinion, 20 years is too long,’ ” Ms. Kaplan said.Email: dwyer@nytimes.com  Twitter: @ jimdwyernyt Advertisement