https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/08/opinion/letters/trump-kirstjen-nielsen-immigration.html
Opinion | U.S. Policies Toward Migrants at the Border - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
873
AdvertisementSupported bylettersReaders discuss the resignation of Kirstjen Nielsen and President Trump’s recent comments about cracking down on immigration.To the Editor:Re “Kirstjen Nielsen Enforced Cruelty at the Border. Her Replacement Could Be Worse” (editorial, nytimes.com, April 7):Nancy Pelosi said of Kirstjen Nielsen’s departure as homeland security secretary, “It is deeply alarming that the Trump administration official who put children in cages is reportedly resigning because she is not extreme enough for the White House’s liking.” Madam Speaker paints this entire nightmare in a few brief descriptive strokes. This pretty much sums up the entire Trump immigration policy. What more really needs to be said?Marge KellerChicagoTo the Editor:Re “Stoking Anti-Semitism Fears, Trump Courts Jews” (news article, April 7):In your report on President Trump’s speech to the Republican Jewish Coalition, you quote him saying of asylum seekers: “You can’t come in. Our country is full. What can we do? We can’t handle any more.” Apparently the speech was received with “raucous applause and cheers.” Really? Is memory so short that people have forgotten the St. Louis, a ship carrying more than 900 Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany that was turned away?John WiseGuerneville, Calif.To the Editor:In “Mr. Trump’s Terrible Border ‘Solutions’” (editorial, April 2), you claim that the Trump administration is “shooting America in the foot” by threatening to close the border with Mexico (now delayed) and cut off aid to Central American countries. Both of my parents were immigrants and waited years for citizenship. They did not just show up at the border and seek asylum. Customs and Border Protection and Immigration and Customs Enforcement lack the resources to protect our borders. Subsidies to El Salvador have not helped with the problem of illegal immigration. Even President Barack Obama’s homeland security secretary, Jeh Johnson, acknowledges that there is a crisis on our border.We need to deal with this problem. Why should we be giving aid to countries that have no strategic importance to us?We should instead redirect funds from those countries to our border security agencies. A wall is not a solution, but neither is giving money to Central American countries. Timothy ZranovEnglewood, Colo.To the Editor:Re “A Grand Compromise on Immigration,” by Peter King and Tom Suozzi (Op-Ed, March 25): Representatives King and Suozzi are to be commended for at least proposing a bipartisan solution to immigration reform. Opening a dialogue is the first step toward this solution. But their proposed $2,000 fee — which is the linchpin for funding their initiative — seems to bring us back to the issue of income inequality. The requirement that an undocumented person pay a $2,000 fee “to qualify for protection” appears to exclude those with fragile financial resources who simply cannot afford the fee. Like the poll tax, this fee requirement is not consistent with America’s democratic principles. It should not be part of legislation.Congress has a moral obligation to appropriate the necessary funds for administrative costs, border security and Central American aid without having to split the affected population into the haves and have-nots.Robert KleinNew YorkAdvertisement