https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/08/magazine/the-displaced-oleg.html
The Displaced: Oleg - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1103
At 11, he is living in the ruins of his former life.Oleg Teryokhin sitting among the wreckage of his school in Nikishino, a village in the separatist area of eastern Ukraine.CreditCreditLynsey Addario for The New York TimesSupported byBy Andrew E. KramerOleg Teryokhin was living with his mother and father in Nikishino, a rural village of fewer than 1,000 coal miners, farmers and their families in eastern Ukraine, when fighting broke out in April 2014. Hastily formed separatist militias, goaded and armed by Moscow, rose up in a rebellion against a new, pro-Western government in Kiev. In the first months of the conflict, the fighting was far from Nikishino, and Oleg, then 10, spent the early summer tearing about the village on his bicycle, zipping past its old brick cottages and apricot orchards. Then, in July, scorched scraps of clothing and bits of paper with foreign writing blew through the village — debris from the crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, the passenger jet that was shot down, killing hundreds of people whose bodies lay in fields just south of the village. When Oleg carried some of these items home, his mother, Galina, was horrified that the conflict had come so close.A few weeks later, she and Oleg left their village, seeking shelter elsewhere in Ukraine. Oleg’s father, Aleksandr, a coal miner, stayed to tend to their two cattle and Galina’s elderly father. But by November the fighting had intensified, and a front line separated Aleksandr from the home of Galina’s father. He abandoned the livestock and joined his wife and son and the more than 130,000 internally displaced people in the Kharkiv region of Ukraine. The family spent most of the winter in a small, drafty cottage that they rented, struggling with boredom and a shortage of firewood.Oleg and his family fled as internally displaced people during the fighting. When they returned, they found their once-familiar village transformed into surreal scenes of destruction. Most of the buildings and houses were wholly or partly destroyed, including Oleg’s home. ‘‘I already got used to it,” Oleg said of the damage. ‘‘I don’t think about it.’’Battles raged in and around Nikishino in the ensuing months, and the separatists eventually took control. Oleg’s family heard nothing from Galina’s father. As cease-fire talks halted the worst of the fighting in February, Oleg’s family, along with a few dozen others, returned to the village. They discovered her father’s body in the backyard of his house. He had probably been killed by shrapnel and had lain frozen outside for months. “Before the war, I visited him every day,” Oleg, now 11, said. “Now I visit his grave.”Most of the village’s 360 houses were wholly or partly destroyed. Oleg’s home was one of them: A shell hit his bedroom and blew a hole through the roof. His school was hit, too. Looking at the ruined building, Oleg said, “When the teachers would yell at us, we used to say: ‘Wouldn’t it be cool if the school blew up?’ I would never say that anymore.”The war has divided Ukraine into three parts: a main territory under the central government; the Crimean Peninsula, claimed by Russia; and the separatist zone where Nikishino lies. As the conflict settles into a stalemate — with a cease-fire but no final resolution, much less any plan for reconstruction — roughly 3.2 million people, including Oleg and his family, now live amid destruction or in dire need of humanitarian aid. Oleg’s father has returned to work in the coal mines, and Oleg goes to school in a neighboring village. As his parents repair their home, the family lives in the portion of the house that is still standing. Once picturesque, Nikishino is today a tableau of shattered glass, broken concrete and scorched timber. “I tell myself: No matter what happens, even if shells are falling, I will never leave my home again,” Oleg said. He still speeds around the village on his bicycle with his friends, roaming this no man’s land.Andrew E. Kramer is a reporter in the Moscow bureau of The Times and has covered the conflicts in Chechnya, Georgia, Iraq and Ukraine.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement