https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/19/arts/television/game-of-thrones-season-6-episode-9-the-hungry-dogs-of-war.html
‘Game of Thrones’ Season 6, Episode 9: The Hungry Dogs of War - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1709
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jeremy Egner“You’re going to die tomorrow, Lord Bolton,” Sansa Stark told her husband early in “Game of Thrones” on Sunday. “Sleep well.”And I’m going to enjoy watching it, she could have added. Or we could have added. Because I’m guessing most of us did.The demise of the lord, Ramsay Bolton, was arguably the most eagerly anticipated death ever on “Game of Thrones” and the show handled it with flair, dispatching him in a poetic, canine-fueled fashion that was no less satisfying for being telegraphed early on. I haven’t fed my hounds in seven days, Ramsay told Jon Snow and friends during the pre-battle trash-talking session, at which point I suspect most of us guessed who would ultimately end up in the dog dish.[Ahead of the final season of “Game of Thrones,” relive it all with our ultimate watching guide, including episode recaps and deep plot dives.]Whether you actually slept well Sunday night probably depends on your tolerance for blood, guts, dead giants and other hallmarks of grim medieval battle, as presented in the tense, grimy and at times oddly beautiful clash that preceded Ramsay’s end. (Though if you’re still watching “Game of Thrones,” your tolerance for such things is probably pretty high.)As directed by Miguel Sapochnik, who also oversaw last season’s terrific “Hardhome” episode, the lengthy sequence was terrifying, gripping and exhilarating, sometimes all at once, a sweeping display of all the ways one can die on the battlefield. There were slashings, shootings and spearings aplenty, of course, but also horse tramplings, neck-bitings and, in one nervy, claustrophobic sequence, a near suffocation by Jon Snow as his army found itself caught between a shield-lined pincer and a sturdy bank of dead soldiers. He emerged in time to see the Arryn cavalry arrive, beckoned by Sansa’s letter, presumably, to turn the tide of the clash.The Battle of the Bastards got top billing but it was not the only thrilling action set piece on Sunday. Indeed, the undercard would have been the star most weeks, as Daenerys Stormborn took to the fiery skies to smack down yet another group of eyeliner-wearing chauvinists. (Has word of the dragons’ potency somehow not reached these purportedly “wise” masters? I know Dany hasn’t been around much, but you’d think they’d handle a Dragon Queen with more delicacy.)We’ll get to that in a minute, but first let’s return to the action up north, which followed a predictable trajectory but still managed to pack in plenty of suspense and emotional heft. That was partly because, while Jon and Sansa seemed safe and Davos wasn’t going to get it until he can have it out with Melisandre over Shireen, the deaths of other favorites, like Tormund, were definitely in play.But it was mostly thanks to enveloping imagery that offered a ground-level immersion into the chaos and confusion of battle. A sequence like Jon Snow looking for foes to fight, as horses, soldiers, arrows and swords whiz by and collide, brings thrills that have little to do with whether you think he might actually die. (Whatever that means for Jon at this point.) Visceral filmmaking bypasses your brain’s logic centers.In a similar fashion, the grinding decimation of so many men conveys on a gut-level the destruction and human misery wrought by the sort of craven striving for power, family and legacy that has defined this show so far. (And for the non-one-percenters of Westeros, we were reminded early on, they’re being destroyed for other people’s power, family and legacy.) Dany and Yara can talk all they want about the carnage their fathers wrought, but seeing a literal pile of corpses makes us feel the need for a new way forward.By the end, after the Knights of the Vale rolled in and through the Bolton forces like an actual tide — convenient and predictable, sure, but also a visual relief, in cool shades of blue — all that was left was for Ramsay to meet his end. True to form, he managed one last despicable act — killing Wun Wun — before Jon rained punches upon him, tenderizing him for the dogs and, I imagined, parceling out revenge on behalf of Ramsay’s many victims. (“This one’s for Rickon, and this one’s for Sansa, and this one’s for Fat Walda and the baby…”)So it all looked great and Ramsay is done, which isn’t to say there weren’t signs of trouble in the Stark camp. For one, despite all the planning and Sansa’s warnings about Ramsay’s tendency to lay traps, it took about four seconds for Jon to do exactly what Ramsay wanted him to do, once Rickon was revealed. (I have two words for you, Rickon: zig and zag.)I’d hoped that the new Jon Snow had picked up some strategic tips in the afterlife, but no. Ramsay devised a masterful battleplan and had the thing won until the Knights of the Vale arrived.And about that: Do we really think Jon would have gone forward with “what we have” had he known Arryn reinforcements might be arriving soon? How many more men died, on both sides, because Sansa didn’t tell Jon about her letter to Littlefinger and what it could bring?Sansa’s withholding seemed inexplicable for a woman desperate to convince Jon that he needed more men. Was it just lazy writing intended to produce a momentous swing in the fight? Or was it a plot point that will come into play later, perhaps as Littlefinger tries to turn Sansa and Jon against one another? Maybe we’ll find out next week, as the ramifications of his aid — what it will cost, what she will be willing to give up — becomes clearer.That said, the shot of Sansa watching the battle’s turn with Littlefinger affirmed her arrival, finally, as a major player in the story. She spent the episode alternately calculating, cleareyed — Rickon’s dead, she told Jon early on — and above all, forthright and confident, asserting her role as a leader in the effort and scolding Jon for ignoring her insights into Ramsay. By the end, she was observing a victory she’d orchestrated and lingering for an extra look at the mauling of the man who brutalized her.Her small grin as she walked away from the Ramsay buffet signaled her delight at the end of both her former tormentor and her status as a woman who would be vulnerable to monsters like him. (Monsters like Littlefinger, however…)Over in Essos, Dany had a few words for the slave masters who began their attack last week. Those words included “surrender or die” and “thanks for the ships,” as we saw the dragon triplets reunited, I think, for the first time since they were quite young.The results were spectacular — the beasts soared nimbly and their bursts of fire were awesome to behold, unless you happened to be a soon-to-be-incinerated sailor. But now that it has apparently harnessed its dragon powers, “Game of Thrones” must figure out how to keep a subplot that has the ultimate trump card interesting. (Just having Drogon and the gang randomly disappear and reappear isn’t going to cut it.)Perhaps the arrival of the Greyjoys will help. If nothing else, Yara and Dany have some chemistry and the story sells itself: Two bold women with lousy kings for fathers, pairing up to cross the Narrow Sea and rename the capital city Queen’s Landing.But one word of advice, ladies: Don’t sleep on that other formidable woman emerging in the North.• R.I.P. Wun Wun. Was he the last of the giants?• Regarding Rickon, others will make the Peter Falk “Serpentine!” joke, and it is apt. But let’s not forget that even as two Starks were returning to the ancestral home, yet another one was biting the dust. Nothing can ever go totally right for that family.• I come to bury Ramsay, not to praise him. But I disagree with the notion that he was a one-dimensional sadist who brought little to the story. He certainly had his excessive stretches — the endless torture of Theon comes to mind — but at his “best” Ramsay represented the sort of toxic, immoral behavior dynastic power structures can enable and at times reward. Plus Iwan Rheon knows how to deliver a line — “My beloved wife, I’ve missed you terribly,” he cooed on Sunday. While it was definitely time for him to go, Ramsay’s departure leaves a hateability hole in the story; the White Walkers are plenty evil but lacking in the charisma department. So in an odd way, I will miss him.• What did you think? Did the battle live up to the hype? Will Davos take out the Red Witch next week? Do you prefer your sour goat’s milk straight up or on the rocks? Please share your thoughts in the comments.Advertisement