https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/21/arts/television/iwan-rheon-on-game-of-thrones-and-ramsay-boltons-most-despicable-acts.html
Iwan Rheon on ‘Game of Thrones’ and Ramsay Bolton’s Most Despicable Acts - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1722
AdvertisementSupported byGame of ThronesBy Jeremy EgnerThis interview contains spoilers from  this past Sunday’s episode of “Game of Thrones.”In the end Ramsay Bolton got what he deserved.Well that may be overstating things — it’s hard to imagine a demise dire enough to adequately punish the scourge of the North, whose atrocities over nearly four seasons on “Game of Thrones” included rape, patricide, infanticide, Fat Walda-cide and castration. But his long-awaited extermination on Sunday night, which began with a fevered bludgeoning by Jon Snow and ended with his hungry hounds making a meal of him, “was a really justified way for him to die,” Iwan Rheon, the man who played Ramsay, said Monday afternoon.“He’s been talking about those hounds for long enough, and he’s been torturing and killing people with them for long enough,” he said.[Ahead of the final season of “Game of Thrones,” relive it all with our ultimate watching guide, including episode recaps and deep plot dives.]Craving and predicting the manner of Ramsay’s end had become an online parlor game in recent weeks, a testament to the sublime loathsomeness Mr. Rheon cultivated in Ramsay. Not only did he do terrible things, he did them with relish — the Welsh actor has described his portrayal as a mash-up of Heath Ledger’s Joker, Liam Gallagher and Dennis the Menace. True to form, Ramsay remained wry and arrogant up until the moment one of his “loyal beasts” tore into his face.In a telephone interview, Mr. Rheon discussed the mechanics of Ramsay’s demise and why it was time for him to go, along with some of his favorite Ramsay moments. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.Were you satisfied with Ramsay’s death?He got a just end, didn’t he? I wanted dragons but you can’t have everything in this life, can you?Did you know going into this season that this would be it for the character? He’d reached a point of no return.Yeah I had a feeling. I sort of thought last year I’d go, actually. A character like Ramsay is so extreme and he’s done such extreme things. What can you make him do next? He’d reached his natural conclusion. And also in terms of the story line, it’s so important that the Starks get Winterfell back. That good kind of comes back into the world a little bit, before it all kicks off in the end.People don’t always stay dead on the show. Any chance Ramsay will be back?I made a bit of a joke to David [Benioff, one of the creators] about how he could be a White Walker now that he’s been eaten by dogs. And David went, “No!” [Laughs.] So yeah, not to give away any spoilers, but Ramsay’s done. And good riddance, I’m sure everyone would agree.What was your final day like?That was my actual last day, that scene. That was the last thing we shot. So it was kind of fitting, really. And to be honest at the end of that day all I really wanted to do was go and get all the [grime] washed off me. I was covered in all manner of it and it was quite uncomfortable. So that was my priority, as opposed to having a big round of applause and being sentimental.Yes you were covered in all sorts of stuff. How long did you have to sit in that?All day. Eating was a challenge.The dog attack began with a pretty brutal strike to the face. How was that shot?I’d love to tell you it was me with some big scary dogs but it was all C.G.I. There’s very little contact with the dogs — they’re trained to be brutal guard dogs. They’re not pets. You’re not allowed to make eye contact with them because they might think you’re threatening them. It’s just not safe to be anywhere near them. We did one shot where there was a real dog behind me in a cage. But the rest of them were digitally put there. It also adds extra pressure to shooting when you throw in a few dogs — you can’t really ask them to be quiet.Now that you’ve had some time to look back on it, do you have a couple of favorite moments from the show?What’s so great about this show is that every season there seems to be one scene that stands out for an actor. This season it was great to do that big parley scene on the horses, finally getting to meet Jon Snow. Also the dinner table scene with everyone was really cool. And the shaving scene in Season 4. That was probably one of he best scenes I’ve ever got to be a part of.What do you think was Ramsay’s most despicable act?So, so many. I think [castrating] Theon was pretty bad. But then, so is raping Sansa Stark. Killing his own brother and stepmother — that was probably not the nicest way to do that. There are so many.What will you miss the most about being on “Game of Thrones”?Just that feeling of being part of the show. It’s wonderful to be in something that you know is good. Everyone’s really proud of the work and it raises the level, I think. That time of the year when we get the scripts and it’s time to start again, when July comes. I’ll be very sad.Advertisement