https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/26/us/politics/kavanaugh-calendar.html
Before Kavanaugh Hearing, New Accusations and Doubts Emerge - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2614
AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicholas Fandos and Michael D. ShearUpdated Sept. 27, 2018: Christine Blasey Ford testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Thursday about her allegations against Judge Kavanaugh. Follow our live coverage.WASHINGTON — Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh faced a whirlwind of new accusations on Wednesday that threatened to derail his nomination to the Supreme Court as key Republican senators wavered in their support and President Trump, in a rambling and combative news conference, acknowledged that he might be persuaded by the testimony of one of the judge’s female accusers.On the eve of an extraordinary hearing of the Senate Judiciary Committee at which both Judge Kavanaugh and Christine Blasey Ford, a California professor who has accused him of assaulting her when they were both teenagers, will testify, Mr. Trump said that “some very evil” Democrats had plotted to destroy Judge Kavanaugh’s reputation. And he lamented what he called “a very dangerous period in our country” in which men are presumed guilty.But even as he described the charges against Judge Kavanaugh as “false accusations,” Mr. Trump seemed, for the first time, to acknowledge the mounting challenges facing his nominee. Asked why he repeatedly sides with men over their female accusers, the president said hearing stories from Dr. Blasey might change his mind.“I’m going to see what happens tomorrow,” Mr. Trump said during an hourlong news conference in New York, where he was attending the United Nations General Assembly. “I’m going to be watching, you know, believe it or not. It’s possible they will be convincing.”But the president admitted that his skepticism about Judge Kavanaugh’s accusers is rooted in his own anger about having himself been the target of what he considers false accusations of sexual misconduct.“So when I see it, I view it differently than someone sitting home watching television where they say, ‘Oh, Judge Kavanaugh this or that,’” Mr. Trump said in a rare moment of televised self-reflection. “It’s happened to me many times.”[Make sense of the people, issues and ideas shaping the 2018 elections with our new politics newsletter.]At Thursday’s hearing, Judge Kavanaugh will appear after Dr. Blasey and is expected to say in his opening statement that the allegations against him are “last-minute smears” and “grotesque and obvious character assassination,” according to testimony he released Wednesday.Those denials include another accusation that surfaced this week, this one from a student at Yale when Judge Kavanaugh was also there. The student, Deborah Ramirez, said in an interview with The New Yorker that he had exposed himself to her at a dormitory party. She has not been asked to testify by the Judiciary Committee.Yet even as he prepared his defense, Judge Kavanaugh and his allies found themselves fending off more charges of sexual misconduct from other women on Wednesday, with perhaps the most explosive accusations coming from a woman represented by Michael Avenatti, the firebrand lawyer who already represents Stephanie Clifford, the pornographic film actress who has said she had an affair with Mr. Trump.A second new accusation was made in an anonymous letter sent to Senator Cory Gardner, Republican of Colorado, by a woman who said her daughter witnessed Judge Kavanaugh drunkenly push her friend, a woman he was dating, up against a wall “very aggressively and sexually” after they left a bar one night in 1998.Her daughter and other witnesses were “shocked,” she said. “Her friend, traumatized, called my daughter yesterday, September 21, 2018, wondering what to do about it,” the woman wrote. “They decided to remain anonymous.”Staff lawyers for the Judiciary Committee have twice questioned Judge Kavanaugh by phone about the accusations — on Sept. 17 and on Tuesday — to prepare him for the Thursday hearing. Late Wednesday, as they were preparing to grill him by phone a third time, the committee released transcripts of the earlier calls that revealed new charges under investigation and Judge Kavanaugh’s at times heated denials.“This is crazytown,” he said at one point.In the call Wednesday night, Judge Kavanaugh denied the new charges leveled by Mr. Avenatti’s client, Julie Swetnick, who said that in the 1980s, she witnessed Judge Kavanaugh and a friend, Mark Judge, try to get teenage girls “inebriated and disoriented so they could then be ‘gang raped.’”Judge Kavanaugh said publicly he did not know Ms. Swetnick and called her claims “ridiculous and from the ‘Twilight Zone.’” Mr. Judge denied the accusations through a lawyer.In another example of the frenzy surrounding Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination, the transcripts showed that committee staff also questioned him about a constituent of Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, who charged — and then recanted Wednesday night — that Judge Kavanaugh had raped a woman on a boat in 1985 in Newport, R.I.In the interview with the committee, Judge Kavanaugh fiercely said that the episode never took place.Democrats seized on the latest accusations to call on Judge Kavanaugh to withdraw, and they pummeled Republicans with requests for outside investigations of the accusations. Republicans, fuming over what they view as increasingly craven partisan attacks, vowed to push ahead with a committee vote scheduled for Friday.But even before Thursday’s hearings, it was clear that Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation was in jeopardy. Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine and a key swing vote, told colleagues in a private meeting that she was troubled by the latest accusations. Holding a printout of Ms. Swetnick’s declaration, she asked why the Judiciary Committee was not issuing a subpoena for Mr. Judge, who has appeared in two separate accusations, according to an official familiar with the meeting.Ms. Collins joined two other Republican senators, Jeff Flake of Arizona and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, in expressing reservations about the Kavanaugh nomination, more than enough to sink it.[Struggling to keep up with the Kavanaugh news? Catch up with our guide.]After days of blanket denials of any bad behavior, prepared remarks released by the committee showed that Judge Kavanaugh would strike a note of contrition on Thursday even as he maintained his innocence on sexual assault. He planned to tell the Senate Judiciary Committee that he sometimes drank too much and “was not perfect” in high school.“I drank beer with my friends, usually on weekends. Sometimes I had too many. In retrospect, I said and did things in high school that make me cringe now,” Mr. Kavanaugh planned to tell the committee, according to the prepared remarks. “But that’s not why we are here today. What I’ve been accused of is far more serious than juvenile misbehavior.”[Read Judge Kavanaugh’s written testimony.]In her own prepared remarks, Dr. Blasey said she had wrestled for weeks with whether to come forward with a dark memory that had “haunted” her and that she knew would upend her life.“I am here today not because I want to be. I am terrified,” she will tell senators, according to the prepared remarks. “I am here because I believe it is my civic duty to tell you what happened to me while Brett Kavanaugh and I were in high school.”Taking direct aim at a central piece of the defense by Judge Kavanaugh and Republican allies who have asserted that she must be misremembering the identity of her assailant, Dr. Blasey will say that their friend groups had “intersected” during her freshman and sophomore years of high school and that they had attended parties together.“We did not know each other well, but I knew him and he knew me,” she plans to say.Other potentially consequential disclosures relating to Dr. Blasey’s claims were quickly overshadowed in a day of continuing developments. They included the release by the Judiciary Committee of handwritten calendar notations from Judge Kavanaugh’s high school days, as well as affidavits from Dr. Blasey’s friends and husband and a copy of the polygraph test administered in August at the advice of her lawyers. The test indicated no deception.Allies of Dr. Blasey and Judge Kavanaugh assembled letters attesting to their integrity. Protesters prepared for rallies. And shadowy threats flooded the phone lines and inboxes of nearly every key player in the drama.On the Senate floor, Mr. Flake delivered a fiery speech chastising both parties for judging the women’s claims — and Mr. Trump for dismissing Dr. Blasey altogether because she did not report a sexual assault when she was a teenager.“How uninformed and uncaring do we have to be to say things like that, much less to believe them?” Mr. Flake said of the president, whom he has often condemned. “Do we have any idea what kind of message that sends, especially to young women?”[Read about Julie Swetnick’s allegations against Judge Kavanaugh.]At the same time, lawyers for Dr. Blasey gave the committee four affidavits — one from Dr. Blasey’s husband and three from friends — stating that she had told them in recent years that Judge Kavanaugh had assaulted her in high school.Neither the calendar nor the affidavits prove or disprove the cases that Dr. Blasey or Judge Kavanaugh have sought to advance, but Democratic senators are likely to use the calendar to question how truthful Judge Kavanaugh has been about his younger days. And although the affidavits suggest that Dr. Blasey’s story has been consistent, Republicans are more likely to focus on the lack of contemporaneous evidence that could corroborate her story.Judge Kavanaugh intended to use the calendar, a green 1982 Northwestern Mutual Audubon wall calendar, as a part of his defense that he did not assault Dr. Blasey nor had any memory or record of a party like the one she described. No such entry exists to note a gathering that summer that exactly corresponds with Dr. Blasey’s recollection.But the calendar pages for May, June, July and August do contain notations that could be seen as helpful to her. He did “go to Judge’s,” an apparent reference to Mr. Judge, the friend of Judge Kavanaugh’s whom Dr. Blasey identified as participating in the assault. On July 1, 1982, he was to go to a friend’s house for “skis” with Mr. Judge and “P.J.” — possibly “brewskis” with Patrick J. Smyth, a classmate of Judge Kavanaugh’s at Georgetown Preparatory School, identified by Dr. Blasey as P.J., another student attending the gathering where she says she was assaulted.Dr. Blasey has said that she did not tell anyone about the assault at the time out of fear that she might get in trouble. But the affidavits, all signed this week, suggest that Dr. Blasey had told some of the people closest to her, including her husband, about the episode at various points in recent years.Russell Ford, Dr. Blasey’s husband, said that his wife shared the details of the assault in a 2012 couple’s therapy session.“She said that she had been trapped in a room and physically restrained by one boy who was molesting her while the other boy watched,” he said.The details are consistent with the account that Dr. Blasey shared with a Democratic senator this summer and The Washington Post this month. Mr. Ford said that his wife mentioned Judge Kavanaugh’s name again in 2017, when Mr. Trump announced Judge Neil M. Gorsuch would be his nominee for the court.Dr. Blasey has said that her therapist took notes during the session, but her lawyers said on Wednesday that they did not plan to release her medical records because of privacy concerns.Sheryl Gay Stolberg contributed reporting.Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.Advertisement