https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/09/books/review/eternal-life-dara-horn.html
The Downside of Immortality - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2150
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Joshua Max FeldmanETERNAL LIFE By Dara Horn 233 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. $25.95.Classical mythology brings us the tale of the Sibyl of Cumae, a prophetess who bargains with Apollo for endless life, and centuries later comes to yearn for death. She failed to negotiate for eternal youth, you see, and with the years she grows shrunken and decrepit and miserable. The story echoes a sentiment that endures in contemporary life: However much time kale, yoga, spa weekends and wonder drugs may buy us, we accept that at some point we’ll become so enfeebled that we’ll be ready to pack it in, once and for all.But what if rolled into endless life were endless youth, and we kept looking and feeling our best, century after century? Would we still, like the Cumaean Sibyl, wish to die? Yup. This is the answer provided by the hero of Dara Horn’s captivating new novel, “Eternal Life.” When we meet Rachel, she’s a suburban great-grandmother, recently widowed, with a ne’er-do-well adult son living in the basement. What her family doesn’t know is that she’s 2,000 some-odd years old. And while she may look like a senior citizen now, anytime Rachel burns to death (happens more than you’d think over the course of millenniums), she wakes up in her 18-year-old body, physically equipped to begin life all over again.But every new “version,” as Rachel calls her countless iterations of work, family and home, brings another cycle of grief and loss. The loved ones who surround her in the 21st century mostly remind her of the scores of loved ones who’ve died. For Rachel, the present is coated in thick layers of the past. And her relationships, particularly with her children, have taken on a numbing predictability. As Horn writes, “At one point she tried to estimate how many thousands of times she had nursed an infant, how many meals she had cooked for others, how many spoons of medicine she had raised to other people’s lips, how many withered hands she had held at bedsides, how many bodies she had buried in the earth.” Rachel’s perspective as a fixed point among ordinary mortals heading from cradle to grave makes her feel isolated, detached — not fully alive, despite (or really because of) her immortality.So Rachel is eager to die. Her problem is she can’t. And she’s given it her best shot: attempted suicide in numerous forms, sought the counsel over the centuries of everyone from ancient holy men to cognitive behavioral therapists.The origins of Rachel’s predicament date back to the days of the Roman occupation of Jerusalem, a world Horn recreates with a deft and convincing touch. As a teenager, Rachel falls in love with Elazar, rakish son of the high priest. As their illicit romance twists and turns, the lovers end up making a vow at the Temple, the consequences of which — eternal life for both of them — only become clear decades later. As is often the case in Horn’s fiction, Jewish history and the lives of her fictional characters wrap around one another, as Rachel’s realization of her inescapable immortality coincides with a brilliant and brutal depiction of the destruction of the ancient Temple, one of the novel’s high points.As the centuries roll along, Elazar keeps popping up in Rachel’s life. While she has good reason to hate him for a betrayal that had fatal consequences, she can’t forsake him, either. It’s not just that he’s the only other person on earth who knows what it’s like to live forever. Rachel’s undying love for Elazar helps her at least understand why life is something to which everyone else around her is clinging to so fiercely.“The hard part isn’t living forever,” Rachel observes. “It’s making life worth living.” And the question at the heart of this wise and appealing novel is finally not how Rachel finds meaning in her eternal life. It is how we, despite our portions of sorrow, tedium and disaster, persist in finding meaning in ours.Joshua Max Feldman is the author of two novels, “The Book of Jonah” and, most recently, “Start Without Me.”Advertisement