https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/05/books/review/gary-shteyngart-lake-success.html
A Road Trip Novel Distills America Through Gary Shteyngart’s Hipstamatic Mind - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2163
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Jonathan MilesLake Success By Gary Shteyngart 334 pp. Random House. $28.Can the immigrant writer, having taken as his or her subject the expatriate experience and all its attendant dislocations, ever really relinquish that subject? Bharati Mukherjee, Henry Roth and Amy Tan might say no; Vladimir Nabokov and V. S. Naipaul, yes. Gary Shteyngart is still thinking about it.Shteyngart’s fourth and latest novel, “Lake Success,” veers from its forebears by placing a Long Island-born financier at its center, rather than Russian émigrés or their children, and for the most part shuns themes of transnational displacement and the hyphenated existence. Yet the fuel and oxygen of immigrant literature — movement, exile, nostalgia, cultural disorientation — are nevertheless what fire the pistons of this trenchant and panoramic novel. Shteyngart’s subject may be America, but it’s Trump’s America: seething, atomizing, foreign and hostile even to itself. “Can it be that we’re all exiles?” Roberto Bolaño once asked, a question that goes echoing through this novel. “Is it possible that all of us are wandering strange lands?”The chief wanderer in “Lake Success” is Barry Cohen. In casting his lead, Shteyngart doesn’t pander to contemporary sympathies: Barry is a white, middle-aged hedge-fund manager “with $2.4 billion of assets under management.” He has Goldman Sachs on his résumé and lives in the same Manhattan apartment building as Rupert Murdoch. He has a congenital inability to remember the names of women, though not those of men, and unironically idolizes Hemingway. Until college (Princeton) he’d never so much as spoken to a black person, and after college — well, “his industry did not employ many African-Americans.” The closest gesture he’s made toward social welfare, aside from social- and tax-minded philanthropy, is a “plan to launch a collection of billionaire trading cards for poor kids, with all the billionaires’ financial stats, such as net worth, Forbes list ranking and liquid and paper assets on the back … so that the ‘black kids could get inspired to do better at school.’” When we meet him, he’s staggeringly drunk — from Japanese whiskey that retails for $33,000 a bottle — and bleeding from wounds bestowed upon him by his wife and his child’s nanny. He’s the anti-mensch. (Readers allergic to unlikable protagonists should approach this book armed with an EpiPen.)The writer Larry Brown employed a storytelling tactic he called “sandbagging,” loading his characters with immense heaps of trouble to see if and how they might wriggle free. This is Shteyngart’s tack with Barry. Barry’s marriage has imploded, due partly to his inability to reckon with his 3-year-old son’s autism diagnosis. The Securities and Exchange Commission is after him for dirty trading. And like many middle-aged men, rich and poor, “he didn’t really know who he was.” So, on a boozy whim, Barry undertakes that most iconic of American responses: He lights out for the territories, in this case boarding a Greyhound bus with a rollerboard suitcase containing six precious wristwatches, “the implements of his true desire.” He ditches his phone, then later his credit cards. By the time he hits Baltimore, he’s already shivering with Kerouacian ecstasy: “Barry had broken free of the surly bonds of his own life. He had been granted refuge in America.”[ Peek inside Gary Shteyngart’s writing retreat, a 1930s Craftsman bungalow | “If there’s no suffering, I tune out”: Read about the books Gary Shteyngart loves, the ones he hates and the ones that shaped him as a writer ]This is a mirage, of course, in much the same way Barry’s success has been, and the reader is in on the joke. We do not root for Barry; we root for his comeuppance. The source for that, we suspect, may be Barry’s wife, Seema, the latter half of a couple Shteyngart itemizes as “one powerful, the other beautiful.” The 29-year-old daughter of Indian immigrants, Seema was a Yale-degreed law clerk before she married Barry, had a son, then took “to doing what hedge-fund wives did best, building a carefully curated life for the family.” (“Marrying an accomplished woman and taking her off the job market,” Shteyngart writes, “was a way to telegraph success among Barry’s peers.”) With Barry on the lam, Seema immediately commences an affair with a novelist, but like most affairs it’s doomed and a little dreary. She frets about their son, Shiva, and, because it’s the summer of 2016, frets about the coming election, and every so often ponders just how she’s “become this scummy rich person,” exiled from her principles. The alternating Seema chapters lack the antic verve of Barry’s, and not only because Barry is high-tailing his way across America while Seema is back in their apartment scheduling therapists for their son. With Barry, the reader senses (and shares) Shteyngart’s glee as he sinks pin after pin into his finance-bro voodoo doll. With Seema, however, the reader discerns authorial restraint, even remorse. After a while Shteyngart mercifully flies in her parents from Cleveland for support.Barry, thankfully, gets no such assistance. Set adrift on Greyhound, with a dwindling stake of both cash and delusions, he embarks upon a nostalgia tour, seeking to reunite with a college girlfriend who’s now a single mother teaching Holocaust studies in El Paso. Along the way he goes bumbling into an America that to him is so foreign as to require subtitles. “In the town of South Hill he saw a Walmart,” Shteyngart writes, “and wondered if that was the first one he had seen in real life.” In West Baltimore he talks wristwatches with a drug dealer and ends up with a rock of crack cocaine tinged with the sharp yellow “of a newborn Parmesan.” En route to Jackson, Miss., he strikes up an improbable romance with a young African-American woman whose generosity he mistakes for thievery. In between it all he takes in the bus window scenery sweeping by: “fake-hacienda suburbs,” a “diorama of cotton, oil and cattle.” A “payday loans sign lit up red and green like an advertisement for a Christmas that would never come.” (Shteyngart tosses lines this good like confetti.) Texas goes “on for 12 hours, much of it featureless,” he writes. “The state had had to invent its own greatness.” Texan vistas aside, Shteyngart finds muchness everywhere he looks, reveling in a surfeit of Americana, and chief among this novel’s pleasures is viewing the nation — its landscapes, its people, its curdled politics, its increasingly feudal inequalities — through the vibrant filters of Shteyngart’s Hipstamatic mind.One does need to make allowances, however: for supporting characters that drop suddenly and permanently from the novel, as through trapdoors, and for the conceit of Barry’s deepening destitution on the road, the self-imposed nature of which keeps the stakes low. (There’s a difference, after all, between fasting and starving.) But these are easy dispensations to grant to a novel so pungent, so frisky and so intent on probing the dissonances and delusions — both individual and collective — that grip this strange land getting stranger. In “Lake Success,” Gary Shteyngart holds his adopted country up to the light, turns it, squints, turns it some more, and finds himself grimacing and laughing in almost equal measure.Jonathan Miles is the author of three novels, including, most recently, “Anatomy of a Miracle.”Advertisement