https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/23/dining/fluffy-tasty-tricky.html
Learning to Cook a Good Pot of Rice - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2046
AdvertisementSupported byBy Kim SeversonATLANTA — Of the many ways I can be humbled in the kitchen, rice is at the top of the list. I’m not a bad cook but, oh, the pots of rice I have driven to a gummy, scorched grave.I blame heritage and inattention. An Italian mother raised me largely in the Midwest. Pasta I can nail in my sleep. The potato is my wingman. But rice? It’s my kryptonite.Centuries of family history do not inform every handful of rice I rinse. I hold no natural rice culinary agility. Rice just wasn’t very rewarding for me to cook, so I hadn’t invested much time trying to learn. Cooking is like that sometimes.This didn’t cause me much concern until I moved to the South, where rice was king before cotton. The entire culinary canons of South Louisiana and the Lowcountry of the Carolinas and the Georgia coast rest on a bed of tender rice, each individual grain happy to be part of a gentle, supportive backdrop to whatever it touches.My rice failings only became more apparent, so I embarked on a simple culinary quest: learn to cook a good pot of long-grain rice.My first call was to Pableaux Johnson, 48, a food writer who often refers to himself as “your Cajun grandma with a beard.” Show up in New Orleans on any given Monday and he may invite you to sit at the long table in his house, where he puts out red beans and rice for an ever-changing band of writers, musicians and other outcasts. A few years ago, he even took his red beans and rice show on the road, cooking the classic Monday washday dish in several states essentially from the back of his car.I came at it from the flank, acting as if I were just calling for a casual rice chat. I even threw in some random facts to cover my ineptitude. “You know, half the rice in America is grown in Arkansas,” I said.And, by the way, did he have a good, basic method for cooking it?“Sweetie, buy a rice cooker,” he said. “That’s how little old Cajun ladies roll and little old Japanese ladies roll.”Cultures that live and die by rice have embraced the electric rice cooker ever since it debuted in Japan in the 1950s. There is no shame, Mr. Johnson said, in using a machine whose premeasured precision guarantees perfect rice with the push of a button and frees up a burner on the stove.But for me, that would be to admit defeat. And, with apologies to all the people who believe they can make an entire Thanksgiving dinner in their rice cookers, I didn’t want another one-function gadget in my kitchen.So I turned my attention to the Middle East, and spun through my contacts list. I called up Samin Nosrat, 34. She’s a cook in the Bay Area who spent part of her adolescence cleaning rice with her grandmother near the shore of the Caspian Sea in northern Iran.Ms. Nosrat, who is working on a cookbook called “Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat,” made me feel better but not less confused.Cal Peternell, the longtime chef at Chez Panisse, shares my problem, Ms. Nosrat said. When she goes to his house to cook, she always has to make the rice.“I don’t think you’re alone,” she said. “I think rice phobia is a thing.”Then she got off on a tangent about the kind of Persian rice that gets crispy on the bottom of the pot. Almost every culture has a version of this. It’s called tahdig in Farsi. Spanish paella cooks know it as socarrat. Koreans call it nurungji. “My mom and every Iranian lady has their own style of making Persian rice and their own Telflon pot to make it in,” Ms. Nosrat said. “It’s fully this crazy superstitious thing with all these stories attached to it. It’s like the entire point of rice.”But prompting Iranian ladies to explain how to make rice, especially crispy rice, is impossible, she said:“All of the instructions are like, ‘You cannot let it boil but it can’t not boil’ and ‘You have to rinse it for many hours, but if you rinse it too long it will get too wet.’ ”Her own tips for a good pot of basic rice without the crust were elusive, too. She spoke of various stocks and hard boils and steaming and adding a handful of this or that. Timing was fluid.Undeterred, I sought advice from an Egyptian contact. Sylvia Totah Calabrese, 63, lives in Manhattan and has taken up food blogging as a hobby. She wrote an essay on rice that discussed in great detail her golden rice, which involves the aforementioned pot, jasmine rice, water, Mazola oil and a tricky bit of two-step timing.“My family was in the rice business in the Ottoman Empire since the 15th century, so it is mother’s milk to me,” Ms. Calabrese said. She, too, threw out rice cooking tips as if she were shelling pistachios. Salt it extremely well. Rinse it until you see the water run clear because less starch means each grain will be separate from the next. Use very good rice.“It baffles me that people can’t cook rice, but I am somebody who doesn’t know what to do with a potato or a pork chop,” she said. “I fully understand there are major cultural difference that come into it. There is a reason Uncle Ben’s was invented.”Family and friends were less sympathetic. I was schooled by my oldest brother, Keith, and by Julia Moskin, a fellow food writer at The New York Times. They promised redemption using that method where you put your finger in the pot and measure rice to the first knuckle and water to the second. Or is it water to the first knuckle with your finger resting on top of the rice?A Facebook plea landed me dozens of wonderful rice memories and tips for making sticky rice and wild rice and rice with coconut milk or peeled chestnuts or various Yankee combinations of milk and sugar. It was all beautiful, but at the end of the day I couldn’t cook a potful.So I ventured back South, calling the people who grow an heirloom variety called Carolina Gold that is becoming popular in a lot of cooking circles. I figured that if I started with really excellent-tasting rice, it might make up for my lousy technique. Carolina Gold is a nutty, sweet and slightly persnickety long-grain rice that can cook up either fluffy and independent or sticky enough to hold together in Southern dishes like Hoppin’ John, a derivative of African one-pot rice dishes.The farmers bringing it back pay homage to the African slaves who were expert rice growers and developed the Gullah/Geechee Lowcountry cuisine.Matthew Raiford, a chef, and his sister, Althea, are testing a strain of Carolina Gold on their family’s 25-acre farm in Brunswick, Ga., on the state’s Southern coast. They are the sixth generation to work the farm, and they grew up eating rice dishes that evolved from African slave kitchens.“Down here rice has always been one of those things that’s about how do we survive,” he said.So, I asked, how do I cook it?“You got to love on it a little bit,” he said.Could he get more specific? “I didn’t learn how to cook rice when I went to culinary school,” he said. “I just watched my mom and my aunt make it in the rice pot. We had rice and lima beans. Rice and peas. Rice and everything. I just grew up with that thing around rice.”Again, I pressed for a basic method. Instead, he veered into a story about a recent dinner invitation. The host had a mess of fresh squid and clams that he expected Mr. Raiford to cook.“The first thing I said was, “Do you all have some rice?’ And I just cooked it old-school.”That meant a pilaf of sorts, in which he sautéed rice with onions, garlic and tomato, added some liquid, boiled it, added the seafood and then more liquid.I thanked him. At this point, I knew I was going to have just go it alone — with a little help from a sympathetic cook with my same affliction.Virginia Willis, a Southern chef, couldn’t make decent rice until she went to culinary school. She finally mastered a pilaf with chicken stock that bakes in the oven. In her book “Bon Appétit, Y’all,” she calls it her $20,000 Rice Pilaf because that’s how much a year of culinary education cost her.I like how Ms. Willis cooks, so I decided to try baking my rice the way she did. I stripped down her recipe and tinkered with it, using water instead of chicken stock, and playing with ratios. I also decided I liked a little butter and salt in my rice, despite dire warnings from some rice purists.And then I made rice. Pots of rice. I made it in the morning and at night, when I was tired and when I was hangry (that’s a mix of hungry and angry) and when I was happy and the house was filled with people.And now, I know rice. At least, a little bit.Recipes: Can’t-Miss Rice | Mexican Rice | Red Beans and Rice | Rice CakesHow to Prep and CookIf making rice is a kitchen chore that can veer into disaster, here are some rules of the road for long-grain rice.Pick the Right Rice Jasmine, a Thai rice, is a little stickier and more fragrant than Basmati, an Indian rice that can be more expensive and cooks up fluffier. Carolina Gold is a nuttier, more flavorful version of American-style long-grain rice.Rinse It Well This eliminates surface starch and makes a cleaner-tasting final product. The water won’t be completely clear, but rather less cloudy.Measure Precisely Different kinds of rice take different amounts of water. If you see “new-crop” on the label, the rice may need less water. Brown rice may take more. Consult the package or do some research on the rice you are cooking. In a pinch, a 2-to-1 ratio of water to rice is a good, scalable guide.Salt Salt matters. Use it, especially with blander Carolina rice. But oversalting is trouble, especially if the rice is being incorporated into a larger recipe.Timing Generally, white long-grain rice will cook, after it has been brought to a boil and set over the lowest flame possible, in 15 to 17 minutes.Patience Always, always, always wait at least 10 minutes once the rice is cooked before you lift the lid and peek.More recipes are at NYT Cooking, which is under development as the recipe resource of The New York Times. If you don’t yet have access, sign up for the wait list, at cooking.nytimes.com.cookingcookingAdvertisement