https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/18/us/school-shootings-2018.html
School Shootings Have Already Killed Dozens in 2018 - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
431
AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel VictorIt’s never long until the next school shooting in America.Hundreds of students have been shot in more than 200 school shootings in recent years, and the bloodshed shows no signs of abating. They have become so common that most people likely don’t remember them all — and in some cases, maybe you didn’t hear about them in the first place.Here are some of the school shootings of 2018. (This list does not include several times guns were used on or near school property, including suicides or attempted shootings in which no one was injured.)A 16-year-old boy shot a 15-year-old girl, Noelle Jones, in Italy, Tex. The gunman, a student at the school whose name was not released, was charged with two counts of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon.The girl was released from the hospital a week later.Two students were killed and 18 people were injured when Gabriel Parker, 15, opened fire on classmates in Benton, Ky.Bailey Nicole Holt, 15, died at the scene. Preston Ryan Cope, 15, died of his injuries at a hospital.Mr. Parker was charged with two counts of murder and 14 counts of first-degree assault.A 12-year-old girl shot a 15-year-old boy in the head and a 15-year-old girl in the wrist in the Westlake North neighborhood of Los Angeles. The authorities described the shooting as unintentional.Seventeen people were killed when Nikolas Cruz, 19, gunned down his former classmates with a semiautomatic AR-15 in Parkland, Fla.He was indicted on 34 counts: 17 of premeditated murder in the first degree, and 17 of attempted murder in the first degree. A Florida prosecutor said he would seek the death penalty.Courtlin Arrington, 17, died after being shot in a classroom in Birmingham, Ala.Michael Jerome Barber, 17, was charged with reckless manslaughter.Jaelynn Willey, 16, died after she was shot in the head in Great Mills, Md. A 14-year-old boy, Desmond Barnes, was hospitalized after being shot in the thigh.The gunman, Austin Wyatt Rollins, 17, fatally shot himself.A 17-year-old student was shot in the ankle in Ocala, Fla., shortly before students planned to walk out as part of a protest against gun violence.Sky Bouche, 19, was charged with terrorism, aggravated assault with a firearm, culpable negligence and carrying a concealed and unlicensed firearm, among other charges.A 14-year-old boy was arrested after shooting another 14-year-old student in the arm in Palmdale, Calif. The police described it as an isolated incident.A school resource officer, Mark Dallas, shot a student who the authorities said had fired a gun near a gymnasium full of students in Dixon, Ill.The student, Matthew A. Milby, 19, was taken to a hospital for injuries that were not life-threatening and charged with three counts of aggravated discharge of a firearm. No one else was harmed.At least 10 people were killed in Santa Fe, Tex. The victims were believed to be a mix of students and adults.A suspect, Dimitrios Pagourtzis, 17, was taken into custody.Advertisement