https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/18/magazine/young-jean-lees-unsafe-spaces.html
Young Jean Lee’s Unsafe Spaces - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1200
FeatureThe first female Asian-American playwright on Broadway takes aim at identity and watches the audience squirm.Young Jean Lee.CreditCreditPaola Kudacki for The New York TimesSupported byBy Parul	 SehgalYoung Jean Lee’s play “Songs of the Dragons Flying to Heaven” begins with a recording of her being hit repeatedly in the face by a man while another directs. You hear a slap. Lee sniffles. Another slap. Lee sniffles.“Long neck,” the director tells her. “Hair,” he says. “Beautiful.” She gets hit again.Finally, the director says, ‘O.K., let’s stop.” Lee sniffles and asks, “Why?” “O.K.,” he says. “Let’s not.”This exchange takes place in the dark. A screen suddenly lights up, showing Lee with her face swollen and tear-streaked. “One more,” she mouths.The slapping scene moves into a psychotic Vaudeville. A chorus of Asian and Asian-American women take the stage, speaking a hodgepodge of Asian languages and rehearsing every ghastly stereotype you can imagine. A character called “Korean-American,” wearing a childish pink shirt with a giraffe on it, smiles, doe-eyed, at the audience and delivers a venomous monologue about growing up with tiger parents: “Have you ever noticed how most Asian-Americans are slightly brain-damaged from having grown up with Asian parents? It’s like being raised by monkeys — these retarded monkeys who can barely speak English and who are too evil to understand anything besides conformity and status.”A ruffle of laughter often follows the speech — the audience sounding nervous but reassured, it seems, to encounter familiar moorings in an ocean of strangeness: stock stories of intergenerational immigrant conflict and the self-loathing minority. But then Korean-American flips the script: “The truth is, if you’re a minority and you do superracist stuff against yourself, then the white people are like, Oh, you’re a ‘cool minority,’ and they treat you like one of them.”The twisty, turbulent, argumentative work of Young Jean Lee is full of such traps: Do you get the joke, or are you the joke? Your responses become part of the play, part of what you watch with fascination and dread. Nervous laughter, I suspect, means more to Lee than any ovation.This month, Lee will become the first Asian-American woman to have a play on Broadway when “Straight White Men,” starring Kate Bornstein, Josh Charles, Ty Defoe, Armie Hammer, Stephen Payne and Paul Schneider, and directed by Anna D. Shapiro, opens at the Hayes Theater on July 23. Lee has written plays about identity politics and identity crises in the lives of Asian-Americans, African-Americans, feminists and evangelicals. Here she scrutinizes what she calls the new ethnic group on the scene: straight white men. For so long simply the default humans, they now face all the indignities of life with a label. This production will be the largest audience yet for Lee’s ceremonial purgings of stereotype, her brazenly unsafe spaces.Lee used to love eavesdropping on viewers as they left her plays. A common remark: “Why would the playwright do this to us?” (The motto of Lee’s production company was “Destroy the Audience.”) But her work is also full of tense pleasures and zany physical comedy. An extended gag in “Songs of the Dragons Flying to Heaven” has the Asian characters scuttling around like crabs as they defend the stage from two white actors who keep encroaching on it. “Untitled Feminist Show” is an entirely wordless play in which six naked performers, often holding pink parasols, tumble around for an hour in joyous, goofy splendor. Lee calls it “ ‘The Lion King’ for older lesbians.”The rigors Lee demands of her audience, she demands of herself too. I keep returning to that recording of her being struck on the face. At first it seems like pure provocation — or penance, perhaps, for airing such awful characterizations of her community. It might be both. It might also be a third thing: her cracked way of signaling solidarity with the viewer. She writes, she has said, to root out her own smugness, self-righteousness and stupidity.Her plays will make you flinch, but it’s hard to look away. When the stage lights go on, the dialogue from the recording loops in my mind: “Let’s stop.” “Let’s not.” “One more.”I met Lee after rehearsal one damp day in Midtown Manhattan. She had an anthropological mission in mind: lunch at Jean-Georges Vongerichten’s flagship restaurant in Trump Tower. She was hoping to observe a certain kind of whiteness — prosperous, unselfconscious — at rest in its natural habitat. Whiteness unmediated by the presence of, well, the two of us, a Korean-American and an Indian-American.Her work grows out of encounters in the world that she is both preternaturally open to and busily engineers. She was full of ideas for field trips for us — breakfast at IHOP one day, a trip on a public bus on another, to get a real look at class in America. No space, I learned, is ever neutral to her. She is always trying to nail down its rules: who’s running things, who fits in, who can’t and why not.We talked over blood-red ribbons of tuna and strawberry shortcake and watched the restaurant from our alcove, our hunting blind. Table after table was being occupied by groups of Asians and Asian-Americans. In the corner, an older Asian woman ate alone, with transfixing slowness; in the middle of the room, a South Asian man and his friends took a large table.When yet another group of Asian patrons was led in, Lee put down her fork. “This is killing me,” she said, delighted. To enter a situation with certain racial or social expectations and have them turned on their heads is the arc of every single play she has ever written.She has emerged as one of the most fearless experimental playwrights of her generation — “the queen of unease,” according to The Village Voice; “a troubling, necessary presence” in American theater, Hilton Als wrote in The New Yorker. She refuses to work from previous knowledge, relying instead on intense research and collaboration.With each production, she begins by asking herself, “What’s the last play in the world you would ever want to write?” Then she casts actors and builds a play for them and with them, incorporating their feedback. In 2009, for example, she decided the play she was most reluctant and least qualified to write was a “black identity-politics show” and proceeded accordingly. “The Shipment” has two parts. The first is a minstrel show in which the five black actors play the roles they said they were used to getting — drug addict, criminal — with a kind of Brechtian awkwardness. For the second part, Lee asked them what roles they always wanted to play. One said a bulimic cake decorator, another Hedda Gabler. She wrote a naturalistic play for them — with a final twist that upends everything we’ve just seen.Lee’s work is about wrongness: about being the wrong kind of man, woman, Asian; about saying the wrong thing; about getting other people wrong. Her characters are ill at ease in their bodies and in the world and, sometimes, in the very play they’re starring in. In “Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals,” her first full-length play (with a title cribbed from Kant), two characters greet each other, sit in awkward silence, admit they don’t know what they’re supposed to be doing and walk off the stage.The plays are oddly constructed; perversely off-kilter; gaudily offensive and random. Their strangeness allows Lee to smuggle in questions about race and gender to an audience distracted by the high jinks — the sudden appearance of Big Bird in her take on “King Lear,” a group suicide in “Songs of the Dragons Flying to Heaven” accompanied by Mariah Carey’s “All I Want for Christmas Is You.” Early on in “The Shipment,” a black comic delivers a frenetic standup routine about incest, infanticide, bestiality and the cluelessness of white people. The audience is so jolted by the “jokes” that they actually seem to hear the material about racism, which they might have otherwise glossed over or ignored.Lee looked around the restaurant with quick, practiced curiosity. At 44, she is a study in contrasts — straight-backed, composed, contained. When she listens, she goes stock-still. But in conversation, she is expansive and trusting and, on occasion, thrillingly indiscreet. There’s an amiable relentlessness to her, a constant churn of intellectual energy. Class is the subject of her new play and her fixation at the moment. She followed up on one of our meetings with an email at 11:27 p.m.: “Identity politics needs to be more intersectional with class, and if it isn’t, it easily becomes yet another tool of capitalism. I hope I’ve made that clear enough!”Lee offered to pay for lunch — with her “Broadway earnings” — and relented only when I assured her, repeatedly, that I could expense it. We left the restaurant together, passing through Nougatine, the more casual sister restaurant of Jean-Georges. The guests were an older crowd, and as far as I could see, all white — the very quarry that eluded Lee. I waited for her to notice. When she did, she laughed, tickled. It was like watching someone open a present.“Straight White Men,” a family drama set at Christmas, is Lee’s first foray into a three-act naturalistic play — the straight white man of theater forms, she has said. What makes the play so weird — what makes it a Young Jean Lee play — isn’t what she adds (there are no “Sesame Street” characters this time) but what she takes out. The main character barely speaks.The play follows three brothers, played by Josh Charles, Armie Hammer and Paul Schneider. Their mother, now dead, was determined that her sons grow up without a sense of entitlement. She even retrofitted a game of Monopoly to give them an idea of the advantages they were born into. She called it “Privilege,” and it featured rules like losing money for being white when you passed Go. Of all her sons, Matt (played by Schneider), the oldest and brightest, took her message most to heart. He was his family’s golden boy, who went to Harvard but has chosen to return home to care for his elderly father (Payne) and take a menial job at a community organization.At dinner, Matt suddenly bursts into tears, which sends his father and brothers into a panic. For all their liberal pieties, we see the full measure of the confusion and disgust with which they view his decisions. Matt is accused of martyring himself to minorities. “All our lives, guys like us have been told to get out of the way so that ‘other’ people can have a chance. Matt’s actually doing what they want!” his brother Jake, a banker, says. “You’re making yourself invisible the way you think we’re supposed to!” Matt stays mostly silent as his family’s arguments crest and crash around him. He responds later, in slightly Bartleby fashion, that he is just trying to find a way “to be useful.”“Straight White Men” looks like an Arthur Miller play and acts a bit like an Arthur Miller play, with its conflict between fathers and sons, between desire and obligation, between self and community. But it withholds some of the key satisfactions for which we go to Miller (or much of theater): motive, psychology, resolution.The play is, in fact, so open, so hospitable to interpretations, that every cast and crew member I talked to described a jarringly different production. For Kate Bornstein, the play drives home how all identities are becoming more capacious and can be transgressed: “We’re talking about people who genuinely question their own privilege and do something about it,” she said. “There are heterosexual white males who are fabulous — we’ve got four of them in the play. I wouldn’t call them straight white men.” For Armie Hammer, “this is an inflammatory play. You’re going to have straight white men who go see this and have to be confronted with the reality of their existence.” Paul Schneider had yet another take: “Regardless of race, gender or sexuality, for me all stories boil down to what our parents did or didn’t do to us.”“Straight White Men” was staged in 2014 at the Public Theater to warm reviews — Charles Isherwood, writing in The Times, called it “mournful and inquisitive.” But Lee worries about its reception today. The play lands in a season when President Trump’s travel ban has just been upheld, immigrant families are being torn apart at the border, reproductive rights are under attack and protections for L.G.B.T.Q. people are being energetically rolled back. The most salient fact about identity politics these days seems less that some straight white men feel diminished by its existence than that the identity politics of some straight white men threaten the existence of so many others.Lee told me she believes that her very decision to write about the plight of middle-aged, upper-middle-class, straight white men — to “center their experiences,” she said — might be enough to trigger a backlash. Schneider called her one night, wanting to discuss his character, and mentioned that one of his friends, a person of color, had read the play and said it was potentially dangerous. She said that the goal of the play was to spark conversations, which it clearly already has. But she won’t deny that it feels particularly risky to stage it now, when “there is something dangerous about not just clearly demarcating the lines of combat, taking a side and fighting on that side.”The art that seems to speak most to the mood of the moment has that flavor — of getting in formation, of fighting the power. Take the movie “Sorry to Bother You,” by Boots Riley, the Oakland-based rapper and activist, a science-fiction workplace comedy that’s also a love letter to labor organizing. Or “Nanette,” a new Netflix standup special by Hannah Gadsby, a rousing commentary on the #MeToo movement and the price of silence exacted on women and minorities. “The story is as you have told it — power belongs to you,” Gadsby says, addressing straight white men. Lee allies herself with these conversations (and Riley is a hero of hers), but she stands slightly apart, asking unpopular questions, like what would really change if power were to simply switch hands. “I don’t hope for a future in which our existing structures stay the same, but I am the one on top,” she wrote in a Facebook post about the slogan “The Future Is Female.”Her plays, with their trickster energies, their interest in delicately destabilizing identity, remind me of what the critic Margo Jefferson called James Baldwin’s “syntactical miscegenation” — the nebulous way he used the words “our” and “your,” slipping without a signal from addressing his black readers to his white ones, sometimes in the same sentence, mingling them.The “us” and “them” in Lee’s plays are always muddled. In “Songs of the Dragons Flying to Heaven,” even the characters’ names continually change. The rudder in her work, and in her thinking, is this aversion to, and constant vigilance against, easy complacencies and groupthink. “Identity politics saved my life,” Lee told me more than once. It gave her the language to understand the racism she encountered as a child growing up in small-town Washington State. But its rhetoric has curdled, she feels. “It’s like you’re good or you’re evil; you’re a queer woman of color or you’re some version of entitled privileged person,” she said. “I feel like compassion is very out right now. Curiosity is out. What’s in is condemnation and punishment. Now is not the moment for nuance; people do not want it.”Young Jean Lee was born in South Korea in 1974, the only child of an evangelical Christian couple who named her after a beloved missionary. The family moved to the United States in 1976, eventually settling in Pullman, Wash., where Lee’s father taught chemical engineering at Washington State University and where Lee would spend her childhood and adolescence in intense isolation.Pullman was then, as well as now, a small, very white town. When it has made news, it has often been for its racism. Harassment of black students and faculty at the university led to the exit of 17 African-American faculty and staff members in the ’90s, remembered by some as the “black exodus.” In more recent years, members of the College Republicans erected a symbolic, Trump-style border wall on campus, and the group’s president marched in last year’s white-supremacist rally in Charlottesville, Va.“When you talk to the young people now, they can’t conceive the level of racism I experienced,” Lee told me. “I almost wasn’t considered human. I didn’t get to be in that category.” When she was very young, she wasn’t even sure what was behind the hatred: “I didn’t know what was going on. I thought something was really wrong with me.” She rarely discussed it with her parents, but her mother remembered how often Lee was sent home from school with stomachaches.Innsoo Lee, Young Jean’s mother, now lives in Virginia, where she moved after her husband died. She is as frank as her daughter, and wry (of watching Lee’s plays, she says, “I didn’t understand a thing”). Her voice still clouds with hurt when describing her daughter’s loneliness. Lee made only one friend in Pullman in the eight years they lived there, but “she tried, she tried many kids.” Innsoo and Lee’s father, James, tried to comfort her. They bought her a dog — but perhaps, Innsoo fretted to me, they should have bought her the dog sooner. They bought her dollhouses, and Lee began to build her own, from kits. Innsoo’s pride was unmistakable when she remembered the fierce concentration with which Lee would play by herself — “with her plastic people.”Lee’s relief at leaving Pullman for Berkeley, where she did her undergraduate and graduate studies, was so profound, she wept when she told me about her first day on campus. “There were so many Asian people, and nobody was making fun of them. My parents came for a visit early on, and they were like, ‘Oh, my God, people are just eating rice on the street — there’s no shame.’ We used to hide that we ate rice.” A boy talked to her, which had never happened before, and Lee ended up going on a date with him that night, her first, so stunned was she by the attention. She thrived in the embrace of a community but began to be troubled by certain tendencies. She had never taken to her parents’ Christian faith — she started questioning it around age 7 — but she was discomfited by how Christians were summarily disparaged on campus and how easily she joined in. This kind of casual contempt for a group of people reminded her of her treatment at the hands of her classmates in Pullman. Lee’s wariness of the crowd seems to have started there, a way of ensuring she would never become what she once feared.She majored in English and began a dissertation on “King Lear.” She was attracted to “Lear” for its wildness. The 17th-century source text is a taut piece of theater — beautifully plotted, something you’d see on Broadway today, she told me. But Shakespeare stuffed it with insanity: “He loved crazy people, he loved fools. He could basically be an experimental playwright.” She married a fellow student, a history Ph.D. But she was increasingly unhappy. Reverting back to childhood consolations, she bought herself a huge dollhouse with handcrafted furniture from Germany. A therapist asked her what she wanted to do, and she blurted out, to her surprise, “Be a playwright.” She discovered that she was studying Shakespeare only because she secretly wanted to write plays herself. “It was like being a veterinarian who says, ‘I want to be a dog!’ ”Her husband dropped out of his Ph.D. program to go to law school at Yale. Lee followed him to New Haven and read through the work of all the playwrights on the faculty of the Yale School of Drama. One appealed to her the most: Jeffrey M. Jones, a scabrous and very funny experimentalist. She emailed him and asked him how to get started. “It’s a hard life,” she remembers him telling her. “If you can do anything else, do that.” But she persisted, and he told her to call Mac Wellman.Since 1998, Wellman has run an M.F.A. program at Brooklyn College that has produced some of American theater’s most innovative playwrights, including Thomas Bradshaw and Annie Baker. He loathes what he calls “the theater of the already known,” and in the custom curriculum he prepares for each student, he dispenses gnomic advice: Write plays with your nondominant hand; write plays “covered with fur”; insert, whenever possible, a farting dwarf.“I listened to her on the phone,” Wellman told me. “Her voice was so intense, I thought, I’m going to let her in. I don’t even need to read anything.” Lee separated from her husband and moved to New York (they eventually divorced). She floundered at first. She hadn’t written much, and she was, Wellman recalled, paralyzed by self-criticism. “Write the worst possible play you can,” he told her. “I don’t want it to be a parody. Just something really awful.”That play became “The Appeal” (2004), a sendup of the romantic poets, whom Lee had always loathed. “It was such a pretentious, horrible idea for a play,” she has said. “It was like a kid playing really sadistically with Barbie dolls. You stick their heads in the toilet, you throw them out the window. The characters were really annoying, and I wrote as badly as I could. When I got bored, I’d restart the scene in the middle without throwing anything away, like a video-game reset.” Wellman showed the play to the head of the Soho Repertory, who decided to stage it — and asked Lee to direct. She turned out to be a “genius director,” Wellman said: She had a preternatural understanding of the stage, how to use it, how to talk to actors.This picture of Lee as a fully formed Athena, appearing on the downtown scene at age 29, hand extended for her Obies, is one I kept running into. She managed to get into an M.F.A. program by impressing the director with the intensity of her voice? And this sudden, untutored genius for directing — where did that come from? I asked Wellman how he accounted for it. He hesitated. “She’s a Korean-American,” he finally proffered. “She’s spent a lot of time looking at what people do and what they say, all of that. I think that’s a big part of it.” Lee’s mentor and friend David Henry Hwang, the writer of “M. Butterfly,” told me something similar. Although Lee only occasionally writes explicitly about the Asian-American experience, there is something in her gaze, an “outsider/insider perspective,” specific to Asian-Americans. Athena might not be a half-bad metaphor after all. To those who know Lee, there is something Greek about how her suffering and strengths are twined together — the way having been ostracized as a child gave her a brutal education in reading other people.In 2003, not yet 30, Lee formed her own theater company. Hwang, the head of the Columbia University M.F.A. program in playwriting, told me that young artists look to Lee “as a kind of model not only aesthetically — in terms of being able to take risks and play with form — but also in terms of self-production and the amount of control she’s had over her own work.” In interviews, Lee has identified as a straight white man herself, only slightly tongue-in-cheek. She can echo her own lines from “Songs of the Dragons Flying to Heaven”: “I’m ambitious and want power. ... People think of me as this empowered Asian female, but really, I’m just a [expletive] white guy.”When an artist emerges, we typically say she has found her voice. In Lee’s case, the discovery was not of a voice but of a method that has allowed her to channel many voices — a process of intensive workshopping and collaboration, pretty much wherever she can find it.Facebook is “a huge part” of her process, she said, a kind of crowdsourced dramaturgy. She runs lines by her friends, finds readers for scripts, does a little needling. Lately, as she works on her new play on class, her posts have sounded like this: “Who are my Facebook friends who identify as Marxist, Socialist and/or Communist? I’m always a little confused when people identify that way, especially if they are middle to upper class and involved with elite institutions. Does it mean you wish someone would take a bunch of your money away and redistribute it? That you are actively involved in organizing solidarity strikes? Is there any praxis required, or is it a label for an intellectual position? Not trying to be snarky, just trying to figure out if I’m a Marxist or not.”Lee’s usual process of teaming up with actors on scriptwriting didn’t work with “Straight White Men.” In previous plays — on gender, Asian-American and black identity — the actors gave her more material than she could possibly use. “You would come to rehearsal and open the floodgates,” she told me. But her straight white male actors were more reserved. “These men have not spent their entire lives experiencing their own identities; they don’t have a lot of material. A lot of them said, ‘I don’t really identify as a straight white man because when I think of a straight white man, I think of a jock.’ ”While writing the play in 2014, Lee ended up interviewing dozens of straight white men and relying on a workshop of diverse college students. She asked them to vent about straight white men — and then asked them how they would like straight white men to behave. “Everyone at the workshop was like: ‘I want a straight white man to sit down and shut up. I want him to take a back seat, to take a supporting role. I don’t want him to be aggressive,’ ” she recalled. “ ‘I want him to listen. I don’t want him taking the head role or the biggest job or to be going after the biggest stuff. I want him in a supporting role to me.’ ”But when she created a character according to these specifications, she was shocked to find that the workshop participants hated him. “I realized that the reason they hated him was — despite all their commitment to social justice — what they believed in most was not being a loser.”That word — “loser” — crops up a lot in Lee’s work. From “Pullman, WA,” set in her hometown, featuring three characters desperately trying to give a self-help seminar: “You are a loser,” one says. “You’re a loser because you were born that way. You will never be anything other than what you are.” In “Straight White Men,” the brothers use it to goad Matt into action. (Jake: “You’re just ... giving in to the total hopelessness of everything, being a loser for no reason?”) Jake impatiently tries to school Matt to compete in the world, to master a job interview. The lesson is tantamount to a tutorial in straight white male drag. To earn the trust of other straight white men, Jake says, you must flawlessly pass as one: command space, do not shrink your body, keep your voice low and even, appear always at ease and, above all, conceal weakness.“Loser” is a word from childhood, of the blunt social distinctions of the playground. It’s Trump’s favorite taunt. There’s a particular, almost gendered sting to it — the way it frames the failure and suffering of men as shameful.Lee has always been interested in exposing how we perform our identities. But in “Straight White Men,” she drills into something more core. Shuck off, subvert, cleave to your gender or race all you like, but a universal horror of weakness remains — a collective orientation toward status, power, control.One evening in June, I met Lee at the New York premiere of Riley’s “Sorry to Bother You.” She laughed at the jokes and laughed harder at moments of awkwardness, terror and confusion. Hammer, who stars as the movie’s villain, had promised to introduce her to Riley at the after-party. Riley was soft-spoken and attentive, wearing a fantastic garment — a kind of watered-silk inverted parachute. He held Lee’s hand through their conversation, pressing it to his chest, congratulating her.“You have to meet Chris,” Hammer said to Lee. The crowd parted for him; he took Lee over to Chris Rock and promptly appeared to forget about her. He, Riley and Rock began talking animatedly, lovingly yelling into one another’s faces. One of Hammer’s assistants materialized at his elbow, wordlessly put a beer into his hand and vanished. Hammer took a sip from the bottle without seeming to wonder how it got there. Lee kept waiting, hands clasped. But the longer the three men talked, the closer they moved together, blotting out the room, a calyx of celebrity and mutual regard.It stung me to see Lee on the outside looking in. After a while, I turned to her to insist that she let me introduce her but found her in conversation with a knot of people, blithely unconcerned. “I don’t know,” she said. “How much faith do you put in the electoral process?” She leaned in a bit, her whole body listening.“So Hollywood,” she told me later, laughing, as we walked a few blocks from the party in the direction of her apartment in Park Slope. I had a pad full of questions I had not asked her that evening — sensible questions about race and representation — but the party had been too loud, and we were never alone. Instead, I asked her about the dollhouses her mother told me about, how transfixed she was by them as a child.Lee told me then about the dollhouse from Germany she bought herself while in her Ph.D. program as a reward for a dissertation she would never complete. But she couldn't play with it anymore: “I was too old.” She kept it, though. And even though it was late, and she looked tired and ready to be rid of me, she invited me up to see it.Lee lives with her boyfriend, a reality-television showrunner who is working on a program about people who have been attacked by wild animals. He was not home. Their place had the feel of an airport hotel, cramped and impersonal with only functional necessities: a chair here, a table there. I liked it immensely. It was clearly occupied by people who made things, who slept here but really lived in their minds.Lee pointed out the dollhouse to me, although she didn’t need to. Wedged between the couch and a desk, it eats up a huge amount of space in the living room — hulking, honey-colored, reaching my shoulder. It has a working elevator.She gestured at it, perplexed. “It’s this thing I’m hanging onto that I don’t want.” She told me I could play with it, if I wanted to, and sat down at her computer.I knelt and started to play. The facade lifted clean off. It was cobwebby inside, a bit of a crime scene. A doll lay face down on the floor next to the bed. The chairs were toppled, dishes scattered. I restored the candlestick to the mantel and wiped a film of dust off the dining table.What did you play? I asked. There were only two real narrative strands, she told me. Order and disorder. One doll would go crazy — turn “toxic” — and destroy the house. The others would be distraught. Then Lee would set it to rights, putting everything back in its place. The fun, she said, was in being able to corral the disorder. The fun was in putting the people where they should go.Parul Sehgal is a book critic for The New York Times.Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.Advertisement