https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/23/realestate/new-buyer-new-building-new-problems.html
New Buyer. New Building. New Problems. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
519
AdvertisementSupported byAsk Real EstateBuyers in new developments often feel powerless when it comes to getting management to address unexpected issues. But that power is within their reach. By Ronda KaysenQ: I recently bought an apartment in a new condo, and it has had persistent plumbing problems. For example, the water takes at least four minutes to heat up to lukewarm. When I complain about the water, management says they’ll send an engineer to look, but nothing improves. Other residents have experienced similar issues. The management and the sponsor of the development are big companies, so even though I own the apartment, I feel powerless. What’s the best way to get these problems fixed?A: Problems have a way of cropping up in any new apartment. But with new construction, it’s often much harder to see those problems coming: If you’re the first person to turn on the faucet, you’ll be the first to notice something wrong with it.Now that you’ve noticed the problems, they need to be addressed. The condo association, not the unit owner, is responsible for maintaining common elements like pipes in the walls. So it should fix what’s broken.In a new building, the sponsor of the development usually controls the board for a period of time, appointing members. The board has a fiduciary duty to protect the interests of the unit owners. However, the sponsor-appointed members may not be motivated to fix problems that expose defects in the construction of the building, because they would have to dig into their own coffers to address them.“Developers have this inherent conflict of interest when they control boards,” said Steven D. Sladkus, a real estate lawyer and founding partner of the Manhattan law firm Schwartz Sladkus Reich Greenberg Atlas. “They need to be pressed hard and reminded of their responsibility to the unit owners and not just to what goes into their pockets.”Get to know your neighbors. Talk to them about the issues they’re experiencing, and the responses they’ve gotten. Form an association and send the board a letter detailing everyone’s issues and reminding the sponsor board members of their responsibility to the unit owners. (The association could also hire a lawyer to do this.)This is an opportunity to start creating a culture in the building, and to begin thinking about eventually taking the reins. Until that happens, you need the board to do its job and fix whatever construction defects you uncover.For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.Advertisement