https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/01/books/review/improvement-joan-silber.html
A Rich Novel That Reveals Itself Through Linked Lives - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2159
AdvertisementSupported byFictionWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Kamila ShamsieIMPROVEMENT By Joan Silber 227 pp. Counterpoint. $26.There is a category of fiction that we might as well call Berger-esque for its engagement with the John Berger line: “Never again will a single story be told as though it were the only one.” That sentence is the epigraph to Michael Ondaatje’s “In the Skin of a Lion” and Arundhati Roy’s “The God of Small Things.” Its influence can also be discerned in the works of Berger admirers such as Nadeem Aslam, Teju Cole and Ali Smith. If you keep an eye out for Berger-esque fiction, it doesn’t take you very long to identify Joan Silber’s work as belonging firmly to this category. A little sleuthing will confirm this by taking you to the interview in which she cites that very line.In keeping with the Berger-esque philosophy, Silber writes her new novel, “Improvement,” as a series of interlinked stories, a generous structural decision that both allows characters to fully inhabit their own narratives and gives space to the lives that intersect or run parallel to them. This is somewhat familiar terrain for Silber; her previous novel “The Size of the World” is also told through connected stories, but in “Improvement” the links between the characters whose stories we’re told are closer and clearer. Silber allows us to see, for instance, the effect of a young man’s death on the woman whose actions had indirectly led to the accident that killed him, before pivoting to show us his lover in another state who never understands why he suddenly severs contact with her, and then pivoting again to the driver of the truck that was involved in the fatal accident.The novel is divided into three parts. The first part is narrated in the first person by Reyna, whose boyfriend, Boyd, is serving time at Rikers Island. That is given to us, initially, as a tangential detail in an opening chapter that is primarily about Reyna’s aunt Kiki, who in her younger days lived in Turkey with her then-husband, Osman. The second chapter homes in on Boyd, and a get-rich-quick scheme he becomes entangled in after prison, which involves transporting cigarettes across state lines.Just as you think you’ve understood the narrative technique, which takes us into Reyna’s life through her relationships, Part II commences, shifting to third-person stories that seem to spool farther and farther away from Reyna, until we arrive at the distant connection of German antiquities smugglers who spent a night at Kiki and Osman’s home in Turkey, four decades ago. With a single tug on the narrative thread, we return to Reyna’s world, and from there to the final section of the novel — which is, again, Reyna’s narrative. But this time we read her and her world differently, having passed through all these other stories that intersect hers, both literally and thematically.This is a novel of richness and wisdom and huge pleasure. Silber knows, and reveals, how close we live to the abyss, but she also revels in joy, particularly the joy that comes from intimate relationships. At one point in the novel a character is transformed by receiving a significant amount of money from an anonymous source. It isn’t just the money itself but her belief that it has come from a former boyfriend who is still keeping an eye out for her that lifts her out of her own abyss. “Look at what love had done, even if it hadn’t done it,” Reyna observes, knowing the real truth of the matter. In its perfectly balanced mix of celebration and wryness, that sentence captures much of the charm of “Improvement.”Kamila Shamsie’s most recent novel is “Home Fire.”Advertisement