https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/24/learning/summer-reading-contest-winner-week-4-on-why-trying-to-be-less-awkward-never-works.html
Summer Reading Contest Winner, Week 4: On ‘Why Trying to Be Less Awkward Never Works’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2508
AdvertisementSupported byContestsBy The Learning NetworkThank you to the 739 teenagers who participated in the fourth week of our 10-week Summer Reading Contest, and congratulations to Christine Choo, our winner, as well as to our many runners-up and honorable mentions.Scroll down to take a look at the variety of topics — from the Thai cave rescue to immigration, abortion and Toys ‘R’ Us — that caught the eyes of our participants this week.And please remember to always check the top of our contest announcement to find the right place to participate, any week from now until Aug. 24.Christine Choo of Singapore chose an article headlined “Why Trying to Be Less Awkward Never Works” and wrote:6-year-old me could never have imagined freezing up just because I was stuck in the train with someone I’ve met only once. I was spunky, bubbly, and definitely not awkward. I would’ve struck up a conversation that could’ve lasted for hours.But with every new candle on a birthday cake that I blew, the bubble of self-consciousness in my body also began to blow up, and soon I found myself trapped in it. Now I actively avoid looking up from my phone on trains, so that I won’t see anyone I know (hopefully, they don’t see me too).It’s lucky that my nerves show up in innocuous ways, like smiling excessively, so most who don’t know me well can’t tell I’m feeling awkward or panicky. But inside me, it’s always a vicious cycle of nerves. At home, I often think of everyone I talked to that day, all of whom I maybe offended. I’m afraid this sheer awkwardness, and the fear that comes with it, will develop into something worse.I’m interested in this article because I don’t want to let my awkwardness stop me from doing things that I want to do. I’m interested because I want to form relationships which don’t have awful first memories. I’m interested because I don’t want to ignore someone who needs help just because I’m too nervous again.I like to think that reading this is a good step in helping me find my 6-year-old self again. Maybe today, I’ll try not to glue my eyes on my phone on the train.bengal11Vanessa100601 on “Braving the Queue, for Mom and Roger Federer”Charlotte Dotson on “What Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s Victory Means”Michaela Fay on “If You Could Amend the Constitution”GoBlue19Jean on “Coney Island’s Newest Wonder: Sharkitecture!”HannaWHS on “Ethiopia and Eritrea Declare an End to Their War”Huda Haque on “We May Be Able to Get Kevin Cooper Off Death Row”Tyler J. Hong on “Why Does Every Soccer Player Do This?”Dhruv Kapadia on “As Migrant Families Are Reunited, Some Children Don’t Recognize Their Mothers”Diya Kraybill on “When a Baby Is an Everyday Reminder of Rohingya Horror”Simon Levien on “Mice Don’t Know When to Let It Go, Either”Emily Sawaked on “In Denmark, Harsh New Laws for Immigrant ‘Ghettos’”Seohyoung on “Must Science Conflict With Spirituality?”Allyson Tarifa on “The Rape Jokes We Still Laugh At”Andrew Yoon on “Anthony Kennedy and the Privatization of Meaning”_________Spencer A. on “A Jury May Have Sentenced a Man to Death Because He’s Gay. And the Justices Don’t Care.”Katie Alerte on “‘I Couldn’t Tell Anyone’: Women Around the World Reveal Intimate Stories of Abortion”Emily Axelsen on “The Power of Positive People”Bengal11Seniz031102 on “Do You Believe in Magic? I Do”Anya Chan on “We’ll All Be Paying for Scott Pruitt for Ages”Edward Cheong on “Starbucks to Stop Using Disposable Plastic Straws by 2020”Amaya Coblentz on “‘I Couldn’t Tell Anyone’: Women Around the World Reveal Intimate Stories of Abortion”Neena D on “I Did a Terrible Thing. How Can I Apologize?”Elise on “The Big Business of Becoming Bhad Bhabie”Alexandra Franzino on “Statue of Liberty Climber Upends Holiday for Thousands”Arcadia Hinton-Cooley on “How Many Teenage Girls Deliberately Harm Themselves? Nearly 1 in 4, Survey Finds.”Stephanie Min-Jae Kim on “Can the Catholic Church ‘Evolve’ on L.G.B.T. Rights?”Lisa Mishra on “Harvard Rated Asian-American Applicants Lower on Personality Traits, Suit Says”Emily Moulton on “Why the Supreme Court Opening Could Affect Gay Marriage as Well as Abortion”Maeve Potteiger on “Treating the Lifelong Harm of Childhood Trauma”Sumeet on “‘We Will Never Abolish ICE,’ Pence Says as He Slams Democrats”Rahul Swaminathan on “How HQ Trivia Became the Best Worst Thing on the Internet”Kayla Woodson on “At Toys ‘R’ Us, ‘There Is Nothing Left’: The Day It Closed for Good”Jennifer Zhou on “Your Graduation Speeches in 50 Words”Advertisement