https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/05/health/short-answers-to-hard-questions-about-weight-loss.html
Short Answers to Hard Questions About Weight Loss - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2257
AdvertisementSupported byThe Science of FatBy Gina KolataAlmost everyone who has ever dieted knows how hard it is to keep the weight off. And almost everyone, including many scientists, has wondered what works. An article on Monday about what happened to contestants from “The Biggest Loser” television show is a vivid illustration of the problem. Although there is no magic formula for weight maintenance, here are answers to some questions that arise over and over.That is the advice dieters often get, but studies have not found that to be the case. For example, a recent Australian study, funded by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council and the Sir Edward Dunlop Medical Research Foundation, randomly assigned 204 obese people to subsist on just 450 to 800 calories a day for 12 weeks, or to cut a more modest 400 to 500 calories a day from their diets over 36 weeks. The goal for both groups was a 15 percent weight loss. Three years after the study began, almost everyone had regained the weight they lost, despite counseling on diet and exercise. There was also no difference in the levels of two hormones, leptin and ghrelin, that drive hunger. The main difference between the groups was that more people in the rapid weight loss group lost at least 12.5 percent of their weight (80 percent, compared with 50 percent in the slow loss group) and fewer dropped out (3 percent, compared with 18 percent).Although it seems to make sense that snacks can pack on the pounds, studies that randomly assigned people to snack or not have failed to confirm this, and even observational studies have not found evidence that snacks undermine weight loss.Muscle burns more calories than fat, so it might stand to reason that the more muscle you have the faster you will burn calories. But it turns out that building muscles has almost no effect on resting metabolism, which determines how many calories a person burns when at rest. The reason is that any muscle you add is small compared with the total amount of skeletal muscle on your body. And most of the time that muscle is at rest. (You can’t go around flexing your biceps nonstop.) Muscles have a very low metabolic rate at rest. One researcher calculated that if a man weighing about 175 pounds lifts weights and puts on about 4½ pounds of muscle — a typical amount for men who lift weights for 12 weeks — he will burn an extra 24 calories a day, the amount in a couple of Life Saver candies.You can as long as you do not eat more calories to make up for the ones you burned. It sounds simple enough, but “this is not as easy a proposition as it sounds,” says Dr. Michael Rosenbaum, a doctor and obesity researcher at Columbia University. The brain controls your hunger and your cravings for food, and it is all too easy to accidentally consume more calories than you burned exercising. That is a major reason studies that use exercise alone to help people lose weight have generally failed to find an effect.Exercise also has an unexpected effect, documented by Dr. Rosenbaum and Dr. Rudolph Leibel at Columbia University. They found that after you lose 10 percent or more of your weight by diet alone, your muscles start using genes that make them more efficient. They burn 20 to 30 percent fewer calories for the same exercise.Many people swear by diets that are low in carbohydrates or gluten free, or revolve around fasting two days out of seven. Dr. Lee Kaplan, an obesity researcher at Harvard, says there is no diet or weight-loss regimen that is guaranteed to work but that people can often maintain a loss of 5 percent of their weight, which is enough for health benefits to kick in. He tells his patients to try one weight-loss program after another in hopes of finding something that works for them.Anecdotal reports by people who have succeeded in keeping weight off tend to have a common theme: constant vigilance, keeping close track of weight, controlling what food is eaten and how much (often by weighing and measuring food), exercising often, putting up with hunger and resisting cravings to the best of their ability. Those who maintain a modest weight loss often report less of a struggle than those trying to keep off large amounts of weight.Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.videoOpinionSandra AamodtAdvertisement