https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/02/opinion/joe-biden-inappropriate-touching.html
Opinion | In Biden’s Defense - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
33
AdvertisementSupported byReaders and a political scientist take exception to the outrage. By David LeonhardtOpinion ColumnistThis article is part of David Leonhardt’s newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it each weekday.Over the weekend, my colleague Ian Prasad Philbrick and I went looking for articles arguing both sides of the Joe Biden question. We found numerous pieces upbraiding Biden for touching people while interacting with them, and several of them argued that his likely presidential campaign should suffer for it.Finding articles making the opposite case wasn’t so easy. (The closest we came was a Medium essay by Stephanie Carter, whose husband served in the Obama administration with Biden.) But if the media consensus this weekend was a condemnation of Biden, the reaction on Monday — both in the media and among readers — was different. It was substantially more mixed and less negative.You can see some of that view in the letters that The Times received from readers. “Men were acculturated to behave in ways that ignored the sensibilities of women, and that is no longer acceptable,” Laura Petiford wrote. “I … struggle to understand how it is helpful to render men like Mr. Biden ‘unfit’ because of behaviors that were so deeply woven into the social fabric of this country that we are only now beginning to address them contextually.”[Listen to “The Argument” podcast every Thursday morning, with Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David Leonhardt.]Susannah Sard wrote, “Sometimes we need to relax.” Richard Brandshaft wrote, “Yet again the proverbial liberal circular firing squad.” And Eileen West wrote: “Joe Biden has plenty to answer for, especially his treatment of Anita Hill. Let his challengers question him on that, rather than being distracted by the media frenzy of the day.”The strongest reaction I saw came from Theda Skocpol, a Harvard political scientist whom I’ve quoted before in this newsletter. She has spent years studying the Tea Party, the Obama presidency and the Trump resistance. I’m going to turn over most of the rest of the newsletter to her, by reprinting an email she sent me.And my own view? I’m still thinking it through. As I said yesterday, Biden’s “handsiness” is a bit strange. I’ve interviewed other politicians who touched me repeatedly during the conversation, and it was unnecessary. I hope Biden understands why the habit makes some people uncomfortable. But I’m increasingly thinking that it should not become a defining issue for his likely campaign.‘Wait a minute’Theda Skocpol writes:The piling on about Joe Biden’s sometimes unwanted affectionate touches by political competitors and media outlets is shameful. Both women who have come forward so far are not talking about workplace abuse or sexual misconduct. I can believe them, and still ask why they are speaking up now. One person, who has supported a political competitor to Biden, acknowledges that she is speaking because Biden is considering entering the primaries; the other says that if Biden really respects women, he should not run and clear the field for the capable women candidates. Wait a minute: Is this what gender equality really means? Is this the kind of society we want to live in — where right-wingers can do any vicious thing they want to anyone and shrug it off, while people on the center-left are supposed to expel from public life anyone who says a single wrong word or has done something benignly intended in the past that now does not fit changed norms? Not me, that is not the kind of America I want to live in. That is not the kind of Democratic primary I want to participate in. If Biden wants to run, I want to hear what he has to say and compare him, fair and square, to the others.Biden has long been known as an emotional person who hugs just about everyone he feels positively about, male and female. Now the social mores have shifted. He needs to say he realizes this and change his behavior accordingly. Everyone else, meanwhile, needs to get a grip. Anyone who experiences an unwanted word or gesture should tell the person involved that they would like them not to say/do that — not wait a decade and contact the media in an expedient moment. And Democrats must keep in mind that they need votes in 2020 from millions of older Americans who are really put off by this kind of out-of-context piling on.[End of Skocpol’s email.]For more …“Joe Biden needs to cut it out. And so does the mob that is after him,” Karen Tumulty writes in The Washington Post.My colleague Michelle Goldberg says that this is the wrong time for Biden to run and criticizes his reaction to this controversy: In response to Lucy Flores’s description of his touching, “Biden could have told her that he was sorry for making her uneasy. Instead, he focused on his intentions rather than her experience, a faint echo of the way he’d ignored [Anita] Hill’s experience decades ago.”Ross Douthat argues that the episode highlights a choice Biden will need to make: Whether to run a campaign in which he is constantly apologizing (and likely losing) or trying to appeal proactively to the large group of Democrats who like him — “a mix of older white Democrats, culturally moderate African-Americans and Hispanics, and anti-Trump suburbanites.”(And, yes, Michelle, Ross and I will be debating about Biden on this week’s episode of “The Argument,” which will be out on Thursday.)If you are not a subscriber to this newsletter, you can subscribe here. You can also join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.David Leonhardt is a former Washington bureau chief for the Times, and was the founding editor of The Upshot and head of The 2020 Project, on the future of the Times newsroom. He won the 2011 Pulitzer Prize for commentary, for columns on the financial crisis.  @DLeonhardt • Facebook Advertisement