https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/17/books/review/michael-mandelbaums-road-to-global-prosperity-and-more.html
Michael Mandelbaum’s ‘Road to Global Prosperity,’ and More - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2308
AdvertisementSupported byThe ShortlistBy Zachary Karabell THE ROAD TO GLOBAL PROSPERITY  By Michael Mandelbaum  Simon & Schuster, $28.  In his latest explication of the international system, the noted foreign affairs scholar and prolific author Mandelbaum grapples with the core questions facing the world today. He takes as his starting point the global financial crisis of 2008-9, and from the outset challenges the “impression that the days of worldwide economic growth had come to an end.” They did not, and have not, he eloquently argues. Mandelbaum (with whom I share an editor, though I don’t know him) examines the major fault lines in the world today, using a series of poetic metaphors: “the roof” for the question of who will provide stability; “the gates” for the challenges of trade and attempts to control its sometimes destructive effects; “the river” for the constant and often unfettered flow of money around the world. He also turns to the key role of what are called the BRIC countries — Brazil, Russia, India and China — as well as the vast teeming world formerly known as “developing.”Though the prose is lucid, the book as a whole suffers from a certain thinness. It reads as a primer. But for those not steeped in these issues, it will no doubt be informative. Mandelbaum’s prognosis is guardedly optimistic. He believes that ultimately the forces of technology and the globalization that enriches ever more people worldwide are simply too powerful to be thwarted by fickle politics and always-looming risks. Shocks there will be, he concludes, but none likely sufficient to disrupt the ­trajectory.  THE SYSTEM WORKED  How the World Stopped Another Great Depression  By Daniel W. Drezner  Oxford University, $29.95.  Rarely does a book state its thesis with such simple clarity and then proceed to illuminate it. Drezner, a professor at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, announces in the first paragraphs that the conventional wisdom about the aftermath of the great financial crisis of 2008 is wrong. Rather than a litany of failed measures from governments and various international organizations, “global economic governance responded in an effective and nimble fashion. In short, the system worked.”Why do so many believe that it did not? The main reason, Drezner says, is a culture of the media and the elite that nostalgically views national governments and international organizations like the I.M.F. as having worked better in the past. Not so, Drezner argues. They never worked well. But during the 2008-9 crisis, they collectively managed to stave off further crisis and restore international growth. Today, the global economy is increasing at a decent clip, and most countries outside of Europe and the United States managed to avoid the crisis’s worst effects.Drezner puts American leadership at the center of the success story, as well as the largely cooperative relationship between the United States and China (at least in the realm of economic issues). Yet what is most intriguing about his argument is the way he depicts global governance as a teeming system of interlocking institutions, each acting responsibly. That stability, Drezner shows, more than the leadership of one hegemon, was probably the key. UTOPIA OR BUST  A Guide to the Present Crisis  By Benjamin Kunkel  Verso, paper, $14.95.  A mainstream Marxist may be an oxymoron, but Kunkel is as close as we get. He is something of a literary wunderkind whose literary debut a number of years ago established him as a promising new voice. Yet his passions include not just novels but also essays and criticism of a decidedly and self-avowedly Marxist bent. This new volume compiles several of Kunkel’s previously published essays along with an introduction. If there is an animating theme — and it is at times difficult to identify a piquant one in the leaden prose that seems de rigueur for postmodern Marxists — it is that “global capitalism or neoliberalism under U.S. hegemony . . . has inflicted economic insecurity and ecological anxiety.” That point seems fairly uncontroversial, and to the extent that it has become a central part of the political debate about inequality and growth in general, Kunkel is perhaps more mainstream than Marxist (or perhaps Marxism is more mainstream than we think).The various essays touch on thinkers like David Harvey, who has added some new twists to old theories about the inevitable breakdown of capitalism, and polemicists like David Graeber, who has written a detailed history of how debt is in fact an instrument for elites to maintain control. Kunkel criticizes the left for failing to offer alternatives that can replace our flawed financial system. Fair enough, but he likewise limits himself to criticism and leaves larger questions only scantily addressed. THE SEVEN SINS OF WALL STREET  Big Banks, Their Washington Lackeys, and the Next Financial Crisis  By Bob Ivry  PublicAffairs, $25.99.  Even five years after the financial crisis of 2008-9 crested, there is zero consensus about its causes. Just about anyone who can be blamed has been: rapacious bankers, venal elected officials, corrupt or incompetent regulators, naïve home buyers. Ivry, an editor and reporter at Bloomberg News, is clear where he stands: The culprit was “the unprecedented growth of the biggest banks” and the subsequent bailout that saved those banks but left the rest of us in little better shape.This is an angry book, full of high dudgeon about the various sins of Wall Street that give Ivry his title. He documents the absurdity of “too big to fail” with a reporter’s eye for the small story that illuminates the larger picture: Hazelwood Road in southwest Memphis, one of the many boom-and-bust epicenters of the housing bubble; the midlevel executives at Citibank and elsewhere who knew there was something amiss but failed to gain the attention of supervisors; the capture of post-crisis regulations like the Dodd-Frank bill by assorted industry lobbyists.Ivry sees the crisis as a simple story of wrongdoing and the failure to punish it. But he is so determined to call out the shortcomings of the financial industry that he effectively gives all other actors in the crisis an undeserved pass.ZACHARY KARABELL, the head of global strategy at Envestnet, is the author of “The Leading Indicators: A Short History of the Numbers That Rule Our World.”Advertisement