https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/28/books/review/jonathan-eig-muhammad-ali-biography.html
Muhammad Ali, Beginning to End for the First Time in a Book - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2192
AdvertisementSupported byNonfictionBy Joyce Carol OatesWhen you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.ALI A Life By Jonathan Eig  Illustrated. 623 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $30.As Herman Melville observed, to write a mighty book you must choose a mighty theme. In American sports culture no individual has inspired more first-rate commentary than Muhammad Ali: There are at least 50 books about this most celebrated of American heavyweight champions, including Norman Mailer’s intensely narrated “The Fight” (1975); Thomas Hauser’s compendium of witness accounts, “Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times” (1991); and David Remnick’s “King of the World: Muhammad Ali and the Rise of an American Hero” (1998), combining biography and social history (race in America, organized crime and sports) with the contagious enthusiasm of a fan’s notes. Now comes Jonathan Eig’s “Ali: A Life,” the first biography of Ali’s entire life, completed in the wake of his death, at 74, in June 2016.This richly researched, sympathetic yet unsparing portrait of a controversial figure for whom the personal and the political dramatically fused could not come at a more appropriate time in our beleaguered American history. Issues of (white) police brutality against black citizens are in the headlines daily and have acquired a dangerously volatile political significance, exacerbated by the race-baiting tweets of the nation’s chief executive; as the 24-year-old heavyweight champion Muhammad Ali stoked the wrath of “patriotic” America by refusing to be inducted into the United States military to fight in the Vietnam War in 1966, so Colin Kaepernick and his fellow athletes in the N.F.L. have enraged much of the (white) citizenry of contemporary America in recent months by declining to participate in the national anthem, as a symbolic protest against the outrage of police brutality against black citizens. Ali’s courageous resistance to the draft was couched in defiantly racial terms: “I don’t have no personal quarrel with those Vietcongs. … All I know is they are considered as Asiatic black people and I don’t have no fight with black people.” (A more famous remark attributed to Ali is “No Vietcong ever called me nigger” — which, in his scrupulously scholarly way, Eig suggests Ali did not originate though he used it subsequently.) How Muhammad Ali would have praised these athletes’ efforts, and the persistence of their efforts in the face of public opprobrium: he who, on the very day following his victory over the heavyweight champion Sonny Liston, in 1964, chose to defy the world’s expectations by converting to the Nation of Islam — “I’m not a Christian anymore. I know where I’m going and I know the truth and I don’t have to be what you want me to be.”Though Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. had been proud of his birth name (“perfect for the prettiest and greatest heavyweight champion of all time”), he agreed without hesitation to change it to a Muslim name at the bequest of the head of the Nation of Islam, Elijah Muhammad — initially “Cassius X,” later “Muhammad Ali.”Born in 1942 in Louisville, Ky., Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. was, as Eig notes, the great-grandson of a slave, the grandson of a convicted murderer and the son of a gregarious man who had a penchant for fighting when drunk, was known to have beaten his wife, and once, in a drunken rage, slashed his young son Cassius Jr. with a knife. Though Louisville was a racially segregated city it was not as virulently racist in the 1940s as many other cities in the mid-South or South; as a boy Cassius was given boxing lessons by a white police officer who volunteered in a Louisville gym, and who recognized his talent immediately: “It was almost impossible to discourage him. … He was easily the hardest worker of any kid I ever taught.” As a high school athlete in 1959 Cassius was already signing autographs for classmates — “Cassius Clay, World Heavyweight Champion.”Soon after winning a gold medal at the 1960 Olympics as a light-heavyweight Cassius Clay turned professional and began his rapid, much-publicized ascent through the heavyweight ranks to the championship at 22, defeating Sonny Liston in one of the biggest upsets in boxing history. He went on then to fight virtually every heavyweight who would dare to fight him: Floyd Patterson, George Chuvalo, Henry Cooper, Cleveland Williams, Ernie Terrell. From the start he was dazzling, unpredictable, combining the rapidity of movement of a welterweight with the size and power of a heavyweight. He carried his gloves provocatively low. His jab was rapid-fire, taunting. He leaned away from punches instead of blocking them. However young boxers were trained to fight defensively, Cassius Clay was determined to be an anomaly, a rebel. “I grew to love the Jack Johnson image. … I wanted to be rough, tough, arrogant, the nigger white folks didn’t like.” In the words of the great A. J. Liebling, writing in The New Yorker, this idiosyncratic young boxer had a “skittering style, like a pebble scaled over water. He was good to watch, but he seemed to make only glancing contact.” Sharp-eyed Liebling was picking up a potential weakness in the mesmerizing young heavyweight that other sportswriters were overlooking. In early fights Ali eluded injury because he was too fast to be caught by opponents’ blows; his older, heavier, more sluggish opponents lunged after him, swinging wildly, missing by inches. Pleasing crowds with his agility and bravura, Ali had no need to cultivate the essentials of defensive boxing.After his three-year suspension from boxing on charges of draft evasion in the late 1960s, however, Ali returned to the ring no longer so swift on his feet nor so confident in his ability to escape injury. Heroically, or quixotically, despite deteriorating skills and the likelihood of the beginning of brain damage, he would fight for another 10 grueling years; he would go on to win some of the most celebrated boxing matches in history: Ali-Frazier II, Ali-Frazier III, Ali-Foreman (the “Rumble in the Jungle”). (Ali’s first fight with Joe Frazier, the 1971 “Fight of the Century,” was won by Frazier on points.) These were devastating, punishing fights (“Closest thing to dyin’ that I know of,” as Ali said of the last Frazier fight, which he won by TKO) that brought Ali worldwide acclaim, and money; at least, a percentage of the money the fights earned. Eig closely chronicles Ali’s tangled financial arrangements with the Machiavellian triad Don King, Bob Arum and Herbert Muhammad, which were not always to his advantage; the reader soon becomes dismayed, then outraged, by the systematic and protracted exploitation of the too-trusting Ali in the years beyond 1974, when he should have retired (after the hard-won victory against George Foreman). His financial affairs were often in “chaos.”After his retirement, as in a kind of reverse magic, Ali’s public reputation grew. His canny managers were, in Eig’s words, building a “brand.” Clad in white, hands shaken with tremors, Ali was the caldron-lighter at the opening ceremony of the 1996 Olympics. He received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from George W. Bush in 2005; he was an honored guest at the inauguration of America’s first black president, Barack Obama, in 2009. For lucrative fees he became a “commodity” endorsing upscale companies and products — I.B.M., Porsche, Louis Vuitton. Indeed, the redeemed Ali seemed to stand “for everything — for peace, love, unity, equality, justice and high-end leather goods — and in standing for everything risked standing for nothing.” As Eig paraphrases the cultural critic Stanley Crouch’s dry observation: “When he was a newly minted Muslim calling white people devils … Ali was a real bear, deadly dangerous and impossible to control. But as Ali found popularity, the boxer began to behave more like a circus bear, one that flashes its teeth and claws but only threatens harm.”If anything in “Ali: A Life” is likely to be controversial it may be the biographer’s acknowledgment of the dark side of boxing, which public celebrations of Ali discreetly ignore. As early as 1970 Ali’s physician Ferdie Pacheco (the “Fight Doctor”) began numbing Ali’s fists before fights with cortisone and an anesthetic called Xylazine. “Ali’s hands were so shot he couldn’t hit a pillow,” Ali’s business manager said. It was suspected by his handlers that Ali had incurred “lasting brain damage after the Frazier fight in 1971,” but his final fight, a shameful debacle in which he could scarcely defend himself against the much younger Trevor Berbick, was in 1981. (Astonishingly, Ali was several times subjected to neurological tests that came back negative, or mostly negative — conveniently, to allow him to continue to fight and to generate income for others.) At last in 1984, belatedly, a responsible neurologist diagnosed Parkinson’s syndrome.Asked why he’d continued to work with Ali despite his diminishing skills, Ferdie Pacheco replied angrily: “You’re in the corner to keep them fighting … not to tell them not to fight. If you didn’t tell them to fight, you were fired immediately.” Ali’s famous “rope-a-dope” strategy, which allowed him to win the Rumble in the Jungle against the younger, stronger George Foreman by absorbing as many powerful blows as Foreman could throw, was in the short run a triumph; in the long run, a medical disaster. The later years of Ali’s decline are depicted in chapters in Eig’s biography with such ominous titles as “‘They May Not Let Me Quit,’” “Staggered,” “Old,” “The Last Hurrah” and “Too Many Punches” that take us 18 years beyond the brightly lit terrain of Remnick’s biography into a hellish twilight of irreversible neurological damage.As Muhammad Ali’s life was an epic of a life so “Ali: A Life” is an epic of a biography. Much in its pages will be familiar to those with some knowledge of boxing but even the familiar may be glimpsed from a new perspective in Eig’s fluent prose; for pages in succession its narrative reads like a novel — a suspenseful novel with a cast of vivid characters who prevail through decades and who help to define the singular individual who was both a brilliantly innovative, incomparably charismatic heavyweight boxer and a public figure whose iconic significance shifted radically through the decades as in an unlikely fairy tale in which the most despised athlete in American history becomes, by the 21st century, the most beloved athlete in American history.On this triumphant note Eig concludes:“Some writers said that Ali had ‘transcended’ race. It was an attempt to whitewash his legacy, and it was dead wrong. Race was the theme of Ali’s life. … He didn’t overcome race. He didn’t overcome racism. He called it out. He faced it down. He refuted it.”Joyce Carol Oates, author of “On Boxing,” is the recipient of the 2015 A. J. Liebling Award for Outstanding Boxing Writing from the Boxing Writers of America.OpinionJoyce Carol OatesAdvertisement