https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/13/well/family/boston-marathon-what-to-know.html
The Boston Marathon Is Monday. Here’s What You Need to Know. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
779
AdvertisementSupported byA bounty of pre-race coverage of the 123rd running of this prestigious event.By Jen A. MillerWelcome to the Running newsletter! Every Saturday morning, we email runners with news, advice and some motivation to help you get up and running. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.Happy Boston Marathon weekend! The 123rd running of this prestigious event, one of the six World Marathon Majors, is happening on Monday.We’ve got a bounty of coverage for your pre-race reading:Matthew Futterman wrote about Sarah Sellers, who finished second in the women’s race last year. Futterman, whose book “Running to the Edge: A Band of Misfits and the Guru who Unlocked the Secrets of Speed” comes out in June, is also moderating a chat at the Boston Marathon expo on Sunday at 1 p.m. with two past marathon champions, Greg Meyer and Jack Fultz. And he’s running himself on Monday — good luck Matt!I wrote about Derek Murphy, a financial analyst who catches people who cheat in races, particularly looking for those who cheat to get into the Boston Marathon. He told me: “When someone cheats to get into Boston, they are keeping out a deserving runner.”If you want to read something about running that has nothing to do with Boston, how about Jeré Longman’s piece about a dog named Cactus, who has joined the 140.7-mile Marathon de Sables?And don’t forget that Lindsay Crouse is hosting a panel this afternoon with last year’s Boston Marathon champion Des Linden, the 2017 New York City Marathon winner Shalane Flanagan, the Paralympian and five-time Boston Marathon winner Tatyana McFadden and the pros Sarah Crouch, Lindsay Flanagan, Sara Hall and Jordan Hasay. That’s today at 3 p.m. at the Calderwood Pavilion, 527 Tremont Street, Boston. Get your tickets here (and use RUN for $5 off).If you’re not in Boston running, or not watching the marathon in person, the race is being broadcast Monday on NBCSN and NBCSN Gold, with coverage starting at 8 a.m. and running through 1 p.m. For those in the Boston area, the race will be shown on WBZ Channel 4. If you’re one of our international readers, here’s a list of how to watch from wherever you are.The men’s wheelchair race starts things off at 9:02 a.m., followed by the women’s wheelchair race at 9:04, then handcycles and duos at 9:25, with the elite women starting at 9:32 and the elite men at 10. The rest of the crowd follows in waves starting at 10:02.I’ll be live tweeting the race. Join me? I’m at @byjenamiller.Sarah Sellers and the Craziest Schedule in RunningCheating to Make the Boston Marathon? You Can’t Run From This DetectiveA Dog Named Cactus Is Dominating a Race Through the DesertSitting for 13 Hours a Day May Sabotage the Benefits of ExerciseA Guide to Sustainable EatingScott Kelly Spent a Year in Orbit. His Body Is Not Quite the Same.Eat Less Meat, Live Longer?Cycling Tours, Once for the Hard-Core, Now Offer E-bikesRun Well — and good luck!— JenJen A. Miller is the author of “Running: A Love Story.”Advertisement