https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/22/upshot/pennsylvania-congressional-map-ruling.html
How Big a Deal Is a New Congressional Map for Pennsylvania? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2607
AdvertisementSupported byAlthough Democrats will probably pick up a few additional seats in this year’s election, the development is less helpful for them than it might at first appear.By Nate CohnThe Republicans are counting on a favorable congressional map to help their majority ride out a possible “wave” election this November. But the congressional map got a little less favorable on Monday when the Pennsylvania Supreme Court struck down the state’s Republican-drawn congressional map. If the ruling holds — and it is expected to, because it’s based on state law, not federal — this will be the fourth Republican gerrymander to be eroded by the courts since the 2014 midterm elections. It will probably cost the Republicans at least one seat in this year’s midterms, while eroding their position in several others.Pennsylvania has one of the harshest gerrymanders in the country. Republicans have held a 13-to-5 majority in the state’s congressional delegation since the map took effect in 2012, even though the state is traditionally competitive in state and federal elections. It’s impossible to predict exactly what the new map will look like. The court ordered the Republican-controlled state legislature to produce a new map by Feb. 9. Gov. Tom Wolf, a Democrat, will have a veto, and if a new map isn’t approved by Feb. 15, the court will probably redraw the map itself. Neither outcome will necessarily yield an incumbent-blind nonpartisan map, like the kind that would be drawn by a commission in California or Arizona.Even so, there are already some things that seem likely:Mr. Meehan’s district, the Seventh, is routinely listed as one of the most severely gerrymandered in the country. It is likely to turn into a strongly Democratic district anchored in Delaware County. After the recent revelation that Mr. Meehan used taxpayer money to pay a sexual harassment settlement, Republicans would seem to have less incentive to take steps to give him even an outside chance at re-election. The open 15th District, vacated by the retiring Charlie Dent, could easily move to the left. Democrats already have a good chance to win the district, and they might even be considered favorites on a new map. But the Lehigh Valley will be a battleground district no matter how the map is drawn.An exercise in ruthless gerrymandering in a state already known for it.Either the 16th or the Sixth District, which both stretch from Philadelphia’s western suburbs to the countryside, would probably drift somewhat to the left but would remain competitive. Whichever district does not drift left might even move to the right, making it hard for the Democrats to gain another advantage.The Eighth District could move slightly to the left if it takes in more of northeast Philadelphia, but the effect wouldn’t be very large.Other districts might move to within striking distance for Democrats — like the open 11th District or Mike Kelly’s Third District — but Republicans would still be considered favorites.It’s easy to say that the new map will lead Democrats to pick up two to four seats. But there’s a catch: In this political environment, they were probably already going to win some of those seats anyway.Just take the district the Democrats were likeliest to pick up: the Seventh. Mr. Meehan was already in a competitive race. The district voted for Hillary Clinton, despite all the weird line drawing. And Mr. Meehan looks even more vulnerable after the news about sexual harassment settlement payouts. So could a new map cost Republicans the Seventh District? Probably. But if Democrats already had a good shot, the change is less valuable than it would have been in 2016, when Mr. Meehan won easily in a more favorable political environment.Over all, six Republican-held seats in the state are currently rated as competitive by the Cook Political Report. We’ll never know how many of those the Democrats would have gained on the current congressional map, but one could argue that the Republicans were already on track to lose two seats. If that’s true, it won’t be quite fair to attribute all Democratic gains to a new map.That’s most likely if the Republican state legislature succeeds in drawing a map that Governor Wolf can accept. They’ll probably take subtle steps to protect their incumbents. It’s easy to imagine, for instance, that the Eighth District — held by the Republican Brian Fitzpatrick — won’t add a chunk of northeast Philadelphia, as many potential nonpartisan maps have suggested. Republican features might remain, even if the court redraws the map. Gerrymandering is a big problem for Democrats in Pennsylvania but not their only one. Geography creates a disadvantage, too. The main challenge for Democrats is that they waste a lot of votes in Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, where Mrs. Clinton won by a combined margin of 81 percent to 16 percent. Those lopsided tallies nearly let Mrs. Clinton win statewide, but don’t yield any additional congressional districts over a more modest 65-to-35-point margin. To my knowledge, the only plausible nine-nine map in the 2016 presidential election would involve splitting Pittsburgh into two districts — something that would run afoul of most nonpartisan redistricting criteria, including keeping municipalities intact and preserving communities of interest. A map with 10 Trump districts and 8 Clinton districts is easier to imagine, especially if the Democratic-led court redraws the map. Such a map would make the Democrats clear favorites to win the 15th District. But the most straightforward maps probably involve 11 districts that voted for Mr. Trump, even though he won by less than one point statewide.Nate Cohn is a domestic correspondent for The Upshot. He covers elections, polling and demographics. Before joining The Times in 2013, he worked as a staff writer for The New Republic.  @Nate_Cohn Advertisement