https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/11/dining/paying-homage-to-burgundy-and-michel-lafarge.html
Paying Homage to Burgundy and Michel Lafarge - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2242
AdvertisementSupported byThe PourBy Eric AsimovIt was a seemingly incongruous scene: 55 worldly gastronomes who had traveled to New York from all parts of the country rising to applaud an 86-year-old farmer at one of Manhattan’s best restaurants. Only in wine do the worlds of agriculture and conspicuous consumption collide with such joyous reverence, especially when the wine is Burgundy and the farmer is Michel Lafarge. Over the last 25 years, the world has fallen in love with Burgundy — the wines, the people and the culture. Perhaps nobody has embodied the allure of Burgundy as well as Michel Lafarge, whose family estate in Volnay makes wines that Burgundy lovers prize for their deep, soulful beauty. They are modest wines in the best sense of the word, not showy but respectful and expressive of their terroirs, graceful, dignified and altogether captivating. So it was that Mr. Lafarge stood before a packed room late last month at Bâtard, with Frédéric and Chantal Lafarge, his son and daughter-in-law, and his partners at the estate, celebrating the 65th vintage he has worked at what is now called Domaine Michel Lafarge. The dinner highlighted the opening night of La Paulée de New York, Daniel Johnnes’s homage to Burgundy.Before the night was over, the crowd was treated to 15 vintages of Lafarge, three whites and 12 reds, ranging from 2011 back to 1953, accompanied by the occasional bit of wisdom issued in French by Mr. Lafarge and translated by Mr. Johnnes.“It was better to spend my time on the wine rather than studying English,” he said. Mr. Lafarge, with a shock of unruly white hair, moved slowly, but his posture was straight and his voice strong. He wore a tie and patterned wool sport coat that one suspects hadn’t left the closet all that often over the years. If most at the dinner had come for the wine, more than a few had come for the man.Jim Clendenen, the proprietor of Au Bon Climat, a pioneering winery in Santa Barbara County, called Mr. Lafarge a mentor and recalled his first trip to Burgundy in 1981, when he got to know several legendary vignerons. “Michel Lafarge and Henri Jayer were the two greatest winemakers I met,” he said. “He’s the Old Guard in the most positive sense, still a farmer, a humble man of the earth.” Even so, he’s always been ahead of his time. In the mid-20th century, Burgundy, along with most of the rest of France, embraced chemical farming, but Mr. Lafarge said he never used chemicals or poisons in the vineyards. He was among the first in Burgundy in 1995 to experiment with biodynamic viticulture. Many have followed. Burgundy, Bordeaux and Champagne are the world’s foremost wine benchmarks. These days, Bordeaux and Champagne call to mind urbane formality, stylish soirees and wealth, images befitting regions whose many famous properties are now owned by luxury-goods corporations. But Burgundy has always been known as a place of small family estates, symbolized by muddy boots and ancient cellars rather than Hermès ties and marketing directors. Even if the Lafarge wines are now sold all over the world, and some vignerons have BMWs parked near their tractors, most, and Mr. Lafarge in particular, remain devoted to their land, their community, their traditions and their wines.The Lafarge domaine was established by his great-great-grandparents early in the 19th century, and it has been worked by Lafarges ever since, with Frédéric, 56, whose first vintage was 1978, and Chantal next in line.“This kind of tradition is something we don’t really know so much about in the United States,” Mr. Johnnes said.La Paulée was celebrating its own anniversary, 15 years since the event at which Mr. Johnnes first adapted a traditional harvest celebration in Meursault for an American audience. It has grown to be one of the country’s most popular wine celebrations.La Paulée and Mr. Johnnes, who is also the wine director for Daniel Boulud’s Dinex Group and an importer, have been instrumental in spreading the word about the magic of Burgundy and, incidentally, creating a demand that has driven up prices of the most prized bottles to absurd levels.Hard as it is to believe, Burgundy had almost no market in the United States in the 1980s. Today, it is so popular that collectors abound, auctions regularly set records for sales of old bottles, and the price of prime vineyard land has skyrocketed, particularly the best grand cru and premier cru sites, the top of the Burgundian hierarchy of terroir. No longer are land transactions strictly local. Corporations and magnates are all seeking a piece of Burgundy.“When somebody wants something here, they will pay any price,” said Becky Wasserman, an American wine broker in Burgundy who has worked with Mr. Lafarge and his family for almost 40 years. The danger for Burgundy is that if the government sets the basis for inheritance taxes by valuing land at the high rates outsiders are willing to pay, it becomes impossible for small family estates to be passed to the next generation. The taxes are simply too high, and small estates can be put in the position of having to sell the land to pay the taxes. The popularity that has lifted Burgundy may threaten the small family estates that are its soul.“It’s a serious matter,” Mr. Lafarge said. “Traditions can disappear.”The situation is not yet dire. Small estates can incorporate or organize themselves in ways to avoid the taxes. But that can create other problems, particularly when vignerons must answer to a board made up of those with aims different from making the best wine possible; a cousin with gambling debts, perhaps. Such family drama has not afflicted the Lafarges. “My father and I are a very good team,” Frédéric Lafarge said. “Always with my father, if we have two ideas, we discuss it until we have one.”That night at Bâtard, the mood was bright and festive as the dinner and wines were served. The Lafarges, who are democratic in their production, make a wide assortment of affordable Burgundies, but the reds we drank, mostly Volnays and also a Pommard and a couple of Beaunes, were all premier crus, new vintages that run up to $300 a bottle. A 2005 Volnay Mitans was beautifully fragrant but far too young to drink now. A 2000 Volnay Caillerets, a vintage not deemed great but still full of pleasurable wines, was graceful and delicious, already showing a bit of age, while a 1999 Volnay Clos du Château des Ducs, a firmer vintage, was richer and more substantial, though not nearly as evolved. The contrast in vintages as well as vineyard sites was fascinating. A 1991 Beaune Grèves, a difficult vintage, was earthier than the Volnays yet still lovely, with a beautiful aroma of raspberries. A 1985 Pommard Pezerolles was superb, sturdier than a Volnay, as a Pommard ought to be, yet complex with a touch of leather to the aroma. An ’83 Volnay Clos des Chênes, also a tough vintage, was light, fragrant and graceful, yet very pale in color. “It was a great success in a bad vintage,” Mr. Lafarge said. “You can’t miss in a great vintage. What’s important for a vigneron is to do well in the mediocre vintages.”He certainly did not miss in 1978, a superb year. The Clos des Chênes was a wine to swoon over, long, deep and complex, gorgeously fragrant and delicate, yet with real staying power. No wine is really intended to last 50 years or more, though many do. Still, when you open an old bottle, it’s a gamble. It paid off with a light, graceful ’66 Clos des Chênes, full of sweet raspberry-scented fruit, a gorgeous, complex ’64 Clos des Chênes. Not so much for a ’59, which had an off-putting medicinal aroma, but a ’53 was extraordinary: pure, intense yet weightless, full of fruit, yet complex and delicious. It was a vintage of which Mr. Lafarge was particularly proud.“It was not recognized as a great vintage, but it’s a real surprise, and I wanted to share it,” he said. Succession is the gravest issue at any family domaine, and Mr. Lafarge seemed content that not only would his son and daughter-in-law carry on, but that their daughter Clothilde, now 22, was also ready to join in. “I’ve worked very hard for the domaine,” he said. “To know that there’s a succession makes me very happy.” An earlier version of this article carried a correction that was posted in error. The initial article did in fact use the correct spelling of Clothilde, the given name of Michel Lafarge’s granddaughter. It is not Clotilde, as the correction erroneously noted.Email: asimov@nytimes.com. And follow Eric Asimov on Twitter: @EricAsimov. Advertisement