http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/24/upshot/the-reality-of-student-debt-is-different-from-the-cliches.html
The Reality of Student Debt Is Different From the Clichés - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1366
AdvertisementSupported byStarting From BehindBy David LeonhardtThe deeply indebted college graduate has become a stock character in the national conversation: the art history major with $50,000 in debt, the underemployed barista with $75,000, the struggling poet with $100,000.The anecdotes have created the impression that such high levels of student debt are typical. But they’re not. They are outliers, and they’re warping our understanding of bigger economic problems.In fact, the share of income that young adults are devoting to loan repayment has remained fairly steady over the last two decades, according to data the Brookings Institutions is releasing on Tuesday. Only 7 percent of young-adult households with education debt have $50,000 or more of it. By contrast, 58 percent of such households have less than $10,000 in debt, and an additional 18 percent have between $10,000 and $20,000.“We are certainly not arguing that the state of the American economy and the higher education system is just great,” Matthew Chingos, a Brookings fellow and one of the authors of the new analysis, told me. “But we do think that the data undermine the prevailing sky-is-falling-type narrative around student debt.”The misperceptions matter because they distract us from the real trouble with our higher education system. It’s not the graduates of expensive colleges who are struggling to get started on a career. Such graduates make for good stories (and they tend to involve the peer group of journalists), but history suggests that most of them will do just fine.The vastly bigger problem is the hundreds of thousands of people who emerge from college with a modest amount of debt yet no degree. For them, college is akin to a house that they had to make the down payment on but can’t live in. In a cost-benefit calculation, they get only the cost. And they are far, far more numerous than bachelor’s degree holders with huge debt burdens.The solutions to the dropout crisis have some overlap with the solutions to the so-called student-debt crisis: more accountability for colleges. For the most part, though, the two issues are different — and require different answers. Lifting the nation’s college graduation rate depends on better, more cost-effective education, rather than merely cheaper education.I realize that the stories of student debt are so common and visceral that many readers will view the Brookings argument with some skepticism. So let me walk through it.The first thing to acknowledge is that student debt has risen over the last two decades. In 2010, 36 percent of households with people between the ages of 20 and 40 had education debt, up from 14 percent in 1989. The median amount of debt — among those with debt — more than doubled, to $8,500 from $3,517, after adjusting for inflation.Some of the increase stems from the encouraging fact that more people are going to college. Contrary to popular belief, average tuition at private (nonprofit) colleges has not increased any faster than overall inflation over the last decade, once financial aid is taken into account, according to College Board data. Well-off students are paying more, but many middle- and low-income students are not.At public colleges, however, tuition really has increased. Average net tuition and fees have risen more than 50 percent over the last decade, to $3,120 for in-state students. The recent cuts to higher-education budgets in some states, like Pennsylvania, play a role.But even with tuition rising, several other factors have helped hold down debt burdens. The incomes of college graduates have grown since the early 1990s. And the repayment time for many loans has become longer. This combination creates perhaps the most surprising fact from the Brookings data:The share of income that a typical student debtor has to devote to loan payments is only marginally higher than it was in the early 1990s — and somewhat lower than it was in late 1990s. It was 3.5 percent in 1992, 4.3 percent in 1998 and 4 percent in 2010.Maybe even more surprisingly, the burden for the people with the most debt is significantly lower today than two decades ago. Someone at the 90th percentile of debt had to devote 15 percent of her income to repayment in 2010, down from 20 percent in 1992.All of which is to say that student debt is indeed a problem for some young people today, but that it’s not a new phenomenon. For most, the returns on a college education have more than kept pace with the cost.What explains the widely held notion to the contrary? I think it stems in large part from the fact that Americans are legitimately frustrated about the economy’s performance over the last 15 years. But when you start looking at the evidence that blames student debt, it can be flimsy.For example, recent research from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York suggested that student loans were keeping some young adults from buying homes. But Beth Akers, one of the authors of the Brookings analysis, notes that the Fed’s data stretches back only to 2003. The pattern may well be real — and have existed for decades.“The evidence,” Ms. Akers says, “doesn’t support the notion that student loan debt is creating a drag on the economy.”She carefully notes that more research might ultimately turn up such evidence, given that student debt has risen. For now, though, the anxiety about student debt has a lot in common with the scare stories that have historically accompanied an expansion of credit to the masses. The reality is that debt allows the middle class and poor to afford many staples of a good life, be it a house, a car or an education. Unlike houses or cars, education at least brings a healthy financial return.With all this being said, the Brookings paper does contain a true cause for concern: “Among households with some college but no bachelor’s degree, the incidence of debt increased from 11 to 41 percent.” The average amount of debt among this group also more than doubled over the last two decades. Some members of the group are thriving community-college graduates, but more are college dropouts.Those dropouts point to some of the big flaws that our higher-education system does have. Many colleges graduate fewer than half of the students they enroll — and resist policy makers’ attempts to hold them accountable for their results. Some public universities devote much of their financial aid to students who do not need it most, creating hardship for others. And recent state budget cuts have caused painful tuition increases on many campuses.If you want to argue that American universities charge too much money for too little education, you can make a pretty good case. But the people paying the real price for those failings aren’t the ones who fit the clichés.Advertisement