https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/28/learning/our-ninth-annual-found-poem-student-contest.html
Our Ninth Annual Found Poem Student Contest - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2518
AdvertisementSupported byContestsBy Katherine SchultenUpdate, Sept. 12: You can find the dates of our 2019 Found Poem Student Contest by visiting our 2018-19 Contest Calendar and scrolling down.Update, June 11: Winners have been announced!_________Every April since 2010 we’ve celebrated the joys of spring and of National Poetry Month with our Found Poem Contest.Participating is easy: Just “find” some poetry in a Times article — any Times article, published at any point in our 167-year history.To help, we also have a companion lesson plan by two teachers who use this contest to “reinforce close reading, experimentation, peer review, self-review and revision” — skills that are valuable across the curriclum. And, if that isn’t enough, we’ve also published an additional 22 ways to teach poetry with The New York Times.Everything you need to know about the contest is below, with links and tips galore. But if you have any questions, please post them in the comments, and we will answer you there, or write to us at LNFeedback@nytimes.com.Good luck!_________Q. What’s a found poem?A. A good nutshell description would be “poems that are composed from words and phrases found in another text.” A New York Times found poem, then, uses words and phrases taken from one or more Times articles, past or present — and since the paper has been publishing since 1851, choosing which Times article(s) to use is often the hardest part.You can mix and combine these words and phrases into a new piece, or you might simply “find” some Times writing that you think is already poetic, as Alan Feuer has done with Craigslist and its “Missed Connections” posts.For more detail about found poetry and its history and classroom uses, we suggest an article from English Journal, “Found and Headline Poems.” (PDF)Q. What are the guidelines for this challenge?A. — Each poem must be 14 lines or fewer.— You may give it your own original title if you like. The title does not count as one of the lines.— Your sole source material must be Times pieces. You can use up to two articles.— The poem should use no more than two of your own words. The rest of the words and phrases can be mixed up any way you like, but should all come from The Times. (You may repeat words from the articles as many times as you like.)— You might choose to write in a traditional poetic form, or not.— Poems may be submitted by groups or by individuals. Only one poem per person is allowed, however.— You must be from 13 to 19 years old but can be from anywhere in the world.— You must post your poem as a comment on this page by 7 a.m. Eastern Time on Friday, May 4.— At the bottom of your found-poem post, please provide us with the URL(s) of the article(s) you used.— Though The Learning Network often publishes excerpts from literary and historical works on our blog via our Text to Text and Poetry Pairing features, those are off limits for this contest. The Times articles they are paired with are, of course, fair game.Note: Our commenting system doesn’t recognize fancy spacing, so using words to create interesting shapes is, unfortunately, not an option.Q. What makes a great found poem?A. Check out the work of our 2017 winners, or scroll through winning poems from previous years. As we note year after year, the poems that stand out always do two things well: They show a real love of, and care with, language, and they honor the Times source material in interesting and creative ways.Remember that in a poem, every word, line break and mark of punctuation carries meaning, so have fun experimenting with repetition of words, alliteration, assonance or anything else that enhances what you would like to say.This related lesson plan, written by two teachers whose students regularly submit to our contest and win, might also help.Finally, here is an interactive tool you might use to play with the words of your poem before you submit it: ReadWriteThink’s Word Mover.Q. How do I find a focus for my poem with the entire New York Times to choose from?A. It’s true you can choose any Times piece ever published for this challenge, and one of our favorites the first year used an article from 1892. But the nine others we liked best that year chose much more recent work, and that’s fine, too.Your poem can be on any topic or theme. It can be about something as broad as science in general or as specific as scientific observation of the relationship between a badger and a cow.It can focus on something currently in the news, or you can use the Times archives to write about the past.You can explore a trend you’ve read about in The Times, or you might simply collect words and phrases from different articles around a theme like identity, loss or joy.Q. How and when do I post my poem?A. Between today, March 28, and Friday, May 4, by 7 a.m. Eastern Time, post your poem as a comment on this post.Q. How do I participate if I don’t have a digital subscription to NYTimes.com?A. The Times’s digital subscription system gives readers free access to five articles each month. If you exceed that limit, you will be asked to become a digital subscriber.One thing you should know, however, is that all Learning Network posts for students, as well as all Times articles linked from them, are accessible without a digital subscription. That means that if you use any of the articles we have linked to here — with the exception of our lesson plans for teachers — they will not count as part of the five-article limit.In addition, keep in mind that you need only one great Times article to create a great found poem.Q. I’m not an English teacher. Can this exercise help me address the standards in my subject area?A. Yes!The process of creating a found poem entails closely reading sophisticated nonfiction writing in order to first identify salient words and details, then recombine those words to create something that summarizes, reacts to or comments on the topic.So, if you’re studying climate change in your science classroom, for example, having students work with one or more articles from the related Times Topics page can be a creative way of having them “determine central ideas or themes of a text and analyze their development and summarize the key supporting details and ideas” or “analyze how two or more texts address similar themes or topics.”Creating the poem, by deciding what to say and how to say it, might then satisfy, say, the Common Core standard that asks that students “apply knowledge of language to understand how language functions in different contexts, to make effective choices for meaning or style.”Every year we get many science-themed poems, on topics from the “God particle” to fruit flies, the human brain to the cosmos.And judging by the many history-themed poems we receive every year, social studies teachers need little convincing that the contest can be a useful way to spur close reading of primary sources.For instance, one year a winning poet used materials from 1941 and 1945 to write verse about World War II. In 2012, the 100th anniversary of the sinking of the Titanic, we received many poems that used both historic and current Times reporting on the event.And, of course, every year a majority of the work we get is focused on current events, on topics from politics to pop culture, so participating in the contest is a way of helping your students understand news that is important to them.Here are some past lesson plans in which we’ve suggested found-poem exercises:“Words of War: Comparing Veterans’ Experiences With War Poetry”“The Dream Continued: Creating Found Poems From Martin Luther King Jr.’s New York Times Obituary”“Campus Catastrophe: Writing Found Poetry to Respond to the Virginia Tech Tragedy”_________Questions? Write to us at LNFeedback@nytimes.com, or post in the comments.The Learning Network runs contests for teenagers all year long. See our full calendar.Advertisement