https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/16/dining/nyc-restaurant-news.html
A Caviar Shop With a Tasting Menu, on the Upper East Side - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
60
AdvertisementSupported byOff the MenuMarky’s Caviar, a Florida company, opens a New York branch; Joe Ogrodnek of Dover and Battersby, unveils a rooftop bar; and more restaurant news.By Florence FabricantThis Florida company has set up shop in New York. Its gilded new boutique and restaurant offers more than a dozen fish-roe products, mostly farm-raised but a few wild, like American hackleback. Russian osetra from sturgeon broodstock raised in Israel is the top of the line. In addition to caviar, there are smoked fish, Ibérico ham, foie gras and other luxury items. Toward the rear of the shop is Huso, a 12-seat restaurant named for beluga (in Latin, huso huso), where the chef, Buddha Lo, an Australian who worked at Eleven Madison Park, prepares an all-day menu of small plates, like king crab with caviar in a lobster bun, Wagyu tartare with caviar, and caviar samplers with blini and buttery madeleines. In the evenings, starting next week, a multicourse tasting menu, $200, will be available. Marky’s is the work of Mark Zaslavsky and Mark Gelman, who started selling seafood, caviar and other imported specialties wholesale and retail, and opened a shop in Miami in 1983. By the late 1990s, they anticipated the restrictions on caviar from wild sturgeon that are now in place and set up an aquaculture operation dedicated to several species of sturgeon, including beluga, in northern Florida. This fall at their Sturgeon Aquafarms, they expect to be able to start producing beluga, for which they hold a government license and international certification. Their farming operation is also working with countries along the Caspian Sea to help restore the sturgeon population, especially for beluga. (Opens Wednesday)1067 Madison Avenue (81st Street), 212-288-0850, markysonmadison.com.This rooftop bar (11th floor) represents the first of the drinking and dining options at Sister City, a new hotel where the chef Joe Ogrodnek (Dover, Battersby) is a partner. The name evokes the location’s view of the sunset. Bar food includes razor clams casino, black bass ceviche, a soft pretzel with pimento cheese, and crispy artichokes. The executive chef working with Mr. Ogrodnek is Andrew Whitcomb, who will also run the kitchen at the hotel’s ground-floor restaurant, Floret, to open in late May. (Wednesday) Sister City hotel, 225 Bowery (Rivington Street), 646-343-4500, lastlight.nyc.This spot, no relation to the Burger and Lobster restaurants, is the work of the restaurateur Don Fellner and Masato Okamoto, who will be serving inventive beef and lobster dishes, including lobster cream puffs in won-ton skins, bacon-cheeseburger pierogies, and a Cajun steak. There is no surf and turf on the menu. (Wednesday) 129 West 29th Street (Avenue of the Americas), snlrestaurant.com.Traditional Turkish fare has come to a neighborhood better known for Greek food. Braised artichokes, muhammara (red-pepper spread), manti, lamb with okra, and baked cauliflower share the menu with Turkish versions of stuffed grape leaves and moussaka.3116 Broadway (31st Street), Astoria, Queens, 718-728-4477.Appropriately enough, subway tiles decorate this bar in the Columbus Circle station, a welcome watering hole amid a collection of food kiosks.Turnstyle Underground Market, 1000S Eighth Avenue (59th Street), turn-style.com.The global chocolatier, now owned by a Turkish conglomerate, has converted a retail store into a cafe. A counter for chocolate drinks, coffee and tea includes the brand’s well-known strawberry-dipping station and a display of grab-and-go pastries, salads and sandwiches, including the trademarked Croiffle, a croissant sandwich pressed in a waffle iron. There is seating at counters and tables. (Thursday) 560 Lexington Avenue (50th Street), godiva.com.This urban winemaking, restaurant and music enterprise, which opened in 2008, will close on Aug. 1. It is to reopen early next year on Pier 57 in Hudson River Park at West 15th Street, the former Marine & Aviation Pier that was to house a street-food market planned by Anthony Bourdain. At 32,000 square feet, it will be 50 percent larger than its original building, which will be taken over by Disney, and about the same size as the City Wineries that have opened in seven other cities. Michael Dorf, the founder and chief executive of City Winery, said the new location would also feature a 350-seat concert hall, a 150-seat loft for performances, a 100-seat restaurant and tasting room with 12 taps dispensing wine, and a full winery that will be visible inside and out. City Winery has a restaurant on Pier 26 (Hubert Street) and will open a winery in the Hudson Valley later this year. Google will occupy most of the space, and there will be a food market of some kind. Pier 57 (West 15th Street).This Italian spot, one of several from Sant Ambroeus Hospitality Group, will open this summer in the Chambers Hotel, taking over the restaurant space from David Chang. 15 West 56th Street. The Princess Diner, a beacon where the highway through Southampton, N.Y., thuds to a bumper-to-bumper halt at Water Mill, closed last year after decades in business. But it will be reborn this summer, with a new name and under Eric Miller, who was the chef and owner of Bay Kitchen Bar in East Hampton for six years. Bostwick’s on the Harbor, a seafood restaurant in East Hampton, will take over what was Bay Kitchen Bar. This promotion to support black-owned enterprises, including food trucks, chefs, caterers and restaurants, keeps expanding. This year, it has kicked off in Houston and will run through April 28. It will continue in Philadelphia from June 9 to 23; New Orleans from June 28 to July 7; Indianapolis from July 21 to 28; Los Angeles from Aug. 11 to 18; Atlanta from Sept. 1 to 15; Oakland, Calif., from Sept. 29 to Oct. 6; and Dallas from Oct. 13 to 27.linktr.ee/blackrestaurantweek.Mr. Buliskeria, an Israeli chef, has become the executive chef at Bustan on the Upper West Side, which just reopened after a fire in November. Ms. Rozenblat, also from Israel, is the new pastry chef.This chef, whose Greenpoint restaurant Pretty Southern has closed, will open Morty’s Oyster Stand this summer in what was Cyril’s in Napeague, N.Y., between Amagansett and Montauk.Follow NYT Food on Twitter and NYT Cooking on Instagram, Facebook and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.An earlier version of this article, using information provided by the owner, misstated the status of a winery City Winery plans to open in the Hudson Valley. The Hudson winery will open later this year; it has not yet opened. It also incorrectly described a City Winery-run location on Pier 26. It is a restaurant, not a restaurant and vineyard.Florence Fabricant is a food and wine writer. She writes the weekly Front Burner and Off the Menu columns, as well as the Pairings column, which appears alongside the monthly wine reviews. She has also written 12 cookbooks.  Advertisement