https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/08/us/politics/john-f-tierney-faces-hurdles-to-re-election.html
Rep. John F. Tierney Braces for Another Fight for His Political Life - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1131
AdvertisementSupported byBy Katharine Q. Seelye and Jess BidgoodPEABODY, Mass. — Representative John F. Tierney, an embattled nine-term Democrat, knows about tough races.A lawyer from Salem, Mr. Tierney first ran for Congress in 1994 from this district on the North Shore of Boston and lost narrowly to the Republican incumbent. He returned for a grudge match in 1996 and beat the incumbent in one of the closest contests in the country. After recounts that stretched into December, Mr. Tierney was declared the winner by just 371 votes out of more than 260,000 cast.For more than a decade, Mr. Tierney, who prides himself on his constituent service, won re-election handily. But in 2012 he found himself in another squeaker. In the end, he edged out his Republican opponent by one percentage point.Now, Mr. Tierney, 62, is bracing for another fight for his political life. Roll Call last year listed him as one of the 10 most vulnerable House incumbents, and in an update last month said he “remains vulnerable — in his primary, but more so in his general election.” And this time, he has to jump through two hoops. First, he faces four fellow Democrats, including one particularly strong opponent, in the primary on Tuesday. If Mr. Tierney prevails, he faces the same Republican who nearly beat him in 2012.Mr. Tierney dismissed the idea that the primary had posed problems for him. “It’s allowed us to organize earlier,” he said in an interview, adding that he expected to be re-elected in November. “I’ve got leadership positions on the committees that are going to be dealing with those important matters, from pay to pension to labor issues.”Still, his opponents smell blood in the water. Mr. Tierney was weakened in 2010 when his wife, Patrice, was caught up in an offshore gambling scandal with her brothers and was sentenced to a month in jail. Running against an extreme and little-known Republican, Mr. Tierney easily won.But by 2012, he had a stronger opponent — a moderate and openly gay Republican named Richard Tisei — and national Republicans spent heavily to make the scandal a major issue in the campaign. Mr. Tierney barely won, even as President Obama carried this district of wealthy suburbs and faded industrial cities by 11 percentage points.Many analysts say that Mr. Obama pulled Mr. Tierney across the finish line. There is no such booster factor to help him this year.But the Democratic establishment, including Senator Elizabeth Warren and organized labor, has rallied around Mr. Tierney, a liberal who is a close ally of the House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee has put him in its “Frontline” program, which supports vulnerable Democrats. And he has history on his side: Successful primaries against House incumbents in Massachusetts are rare, with the last one 22 years ago.None of this has discouraged Seth Moulton, 35, a well-financed, Harvard-educated Marine veteran who served four tours of duty in Iraq and was a top aide to Gen. David H. Petraeus. Mr. Moulton, the strongest of the four Democrats challenging Mr. Tierney, is leveraging voter discontent with Congress, his status as a veteran and his relative youth to draw longtime Tierney supporters to his side. Last month, as the recipient of an honor for military veterans, he had the chance to stand atop the Red Sox dugout at Fenway Park in full military uniform and wave to tens of thousands of cheering spectators. “Moulton would be the Democrats’ dream candidate in just about any other district in the country,” said David Wasserman, who studies House races for the nonpartisan Cook Political Report. But here, he has aggravated the establishment. “He’s forced Tierney to divert attention and resources from a very competitive general election to a primary,” Mr. Wasserman said. “He’s become Democratic strategists’ nightmare.”Until very recently, Mr. Tierney tended to ignore Mr. Moulton. Even as Mr. Moulton turned up the heat, Mr. Tierney’s camp has tried to look past this week’s primary and focused instead on the November election against Mr. Tisei.Mr. Moulton, who seems to have few policy differences with Mr. Tierney, has focused on what he says is Mr. Tierney’s do-nothing record in Congress.“Congressman Tierney is one of the least effective congressmen in the whole country,” Mr. Moulton said in an interview after a debate here.In a negative television ad, Mr. Moulton asserts that Mr. Tierney has passed only one bill, has missed more votes than most other members and was fined for unspecified “illegal campaign activities.”At a recent debate here, Mr. Tierney said Mr. Moulton’s allegation about his productivity was “utter nonsense.” He said he had worked on numerous bills, they just did not bear his name. At a debate in Bedford, Mass., he acknowledged problems in Congress, and blamed the Republicans, sounding as if he were campaigning in a general election. “The problem is John Boehner, and his far-right Republicans can’t get issues to the floor,” Mr. Tierney said.Afterward, Renee Keaney, a retired clinical social worker from Marblehead, said she was sticking with Mr. Tierney. “I’m glad to see another generation getting involved,” she said of Mr. Moulton. “I just think this is the wrong race, because we’ve got a good candidate.”But Mimi Hollister, a retired minister, also from Marblehead, said she was supporting Mr. Moulton. “John Tierney’s been great,” she said. “I’ve supported him for many years. But I think now we need a change, because Congress is so dysfunctional.”In recent days, Mr. Moulton pulled off a rare coup by being endorsed by both The Boston Globe and The Boston Herald, whose editorial boards rarely agree.The Herald called Mr. Tierney “utterly reprehensible,” without specifying why. The Globe knocked him for his “staunch defense of Congress’s business as usual” while saying that Mr. Moulton’s “work in Iraq— negotiating with warlords, developing on-the-ground relationships in tense circumstances might bode well for his ability to deal with recalcitrant Republicans.” Not until last Tuesday, a week before the primary, did Mr. Tierney finally turn his fire on Mr. Moulton. He unleashed a blistering ad in which he essentially accused Mr. Moulton of being a Republican and linked him with the National Rifle Association, the Tea Party and opponents of abortion rights. Mr. Moulton called the ad absurd. The Salem News, which endorsed Mr. Moulton on Thursday, called the ad repugnant and said now was the “time for new leadership.”There is no reliable polling in the race, leaving analysts to speculate that Mr. Tierney’s 11th-hour attack reflected concern in the Tierney camp that Mr. Moulton was gaining ground.Even if Mr. Tierney prevails over Mr. Moulton, his work is hardly done. He will again face Mr. Tisei, who appears eager for his own grudge match.“I’m gay, I’m pro-choice, I have a 26-year record of being someone that’s very independent, and that’s why I almost won last time,” Mr. Tisei said in an interview. “I just ran out of time.”The Cook Political Report rates a matchup between Mr. Tierney and Mr. Tisei as a tossup.  But what if Mr. Moulton were the one facing Mr. Tisei? “There’s very little doubt that if Seth Moulton were the Democrats’ nominee,” Mr. Wasserman said, “he would win this seat.”Advertisement