https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/22/travel/paris-luxury-budget-affordable-tips.html
Five Tips for a Luxury Paris Getaway on a Budget - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
706
AdvertisementSupported byTravel TipsThe City of Lights is known as a pricey place to vacation, but with these tips you can stretch your dollars and still enjoy the finer things Paris has to offer.By Shivani VoraWhether it’s a hotel stay, shopping or dining out, a vacation to Paris can be a pricey proposition, especially if you’ve got your sights set on an upscale trip. But there are plenty of ways to stretch your dollar in the City of Lights and have a high-end getaway. Barkley Hickcox, a Paris specialist and an owner of Local Foreigner, has a few tips to help travelers make the most of their Parisian getaway. The ideal time to visit Paris is between November and April, when hotel prices are at their lowest. Some high-end properties offer even further discounts if you book a stay several months in advance. Ms. Hickcox is a fan of visiting during the first half of December, when the city is decorated with holiday lights and particularly beautiful. If you prefer warmer weather, April can be a mild and sunny month to visit. But if you’re on a budget, avoid going in June and September because hotel rates are at their peak.Families traveling to Paris should consider staying in a high-end apartment instead of a hotel, Ms. Hickcox said. “An apartment is less expensive than booking multiple rooms at a five-star hotel, and since you have a kitchen, you can save money on food costs by eating in occasionally,” she said. Companies like OneFineStay, Paris Perfect and Paris Attitude have a range of luxury apartment listings in Paris. If you prefer a hotel, choose boutique properties in non-touristy neighborhoods. The Hoxton, in the Second Arrondissement, for example, is a former residence dating back to the 18th century and has chic accommodations at reasonable prices. Another option is Le Saint Hotel a Paris, in the heart of Saint-Germain. Paris is known for fine cuisine, but rather than dining at one of the city’s renowned restaurants at dinnertime, go for lunch, when the tab will be much lower and the cuisine just as good. Several popular eateries offer affordable midday prix fixe menus. Frenchie, for example, has a four-course, seasonally-driven menu for 45 euros (about $56) while the four-course lunch menu at Septime, another seasonal spot, is 42 euros. For dinner, Ms. Hickcox recommended going to restaurants in residential neighborhoods such as South Pigalle, the Haut Marais and Montmartre. “You’ll find lots of great eateries where you can have dinner with wine for 35 to 50 euros a person,” she said. One of Ms. Hickcox’s top resources to find off-the-beaten path restaurants is the blog Paris by Mouth. Ms. Hickcox’s favorite way to explore Paris is on foot. “You can fully appreciate the city’s beauty by walking, and it’s designed for walkers because there are walking paths and sidewalks everywhere,” she said. For longer distances, she suggested using the city’s bike share system, Velib. A weeklong pass costs 15 euros, and there are stations everywhere. Or, try the Metro, Paris’ subway system. It’s convenient, and you can buy daily and weekly passes. While Paris has no shortage of big-name designer stores, the city’s flea markets are full of unusual and far more affordable finds. Marche aux Puces St Ouen, for instance, sells vintage furniture, vintage designer jewelry and handbags as well as old books, maps and other knickknacks. Ms. Hickcox also likes Marche aux Puces de la Porte de Vanves, a smaller, more manageable version of St Ouen. Advertisement