https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/15/realestate/beacon-ny-quaint-city-rediscovered.html
Beacon, N.Y.: Quaint City Rediscovered - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1842
AdvertisementSupported byLiving InIndustrial architecture remains from Beacon’s days as a busy manufacturing community. The small Dutchess County city was revitalized as an creative hub with the opening of Dia:Beacon in 2003.By Savannah Waring WalkerHats, carpets, baby carriages, shower doors, cookie cartons: These are among the many products made, at one point or another, in Beacon, a small city hugging the Hudson in southwestern Dutchess County. Because of them, said Clara Lou Gould, who was the mayor from 1990 to 2007, “people with expertise in different categories would come to do different jobs” and stay on, resulting in a population representing as many as 50 nationalities.The wealth of 19th- and 20th-century industrial architecture in Beacon testifies to this productive past. Dia:Beacon, the Chelsea artistic offshoot whose 2003 opening helped support the city’s recovery from a prolonged postindustrial slump, has made its home in a onetime Nabisco box-printing factory.When Dia bought the building in the ‘90s, said Timothy Dexter, the city’s building inspector, “nobody wanted the Beacon school district.” The improvement in fortunes since then — a result of a “long, long transition,” he said — is also a result of luck: “Dia found us; we didn’t find them.”The longtime residence of Pete Seeger, the activist and folk icon who died early this year at 94, was another piece of luck. His environmental advocacy not only helped rid the city and its riverfront of various pollutants, but helped put Beacon on New York City’s radar. The distance of 60-odd miles isn’t much, especially via the Metro-North Railroad express train, and as New Yorkers — often Brooklynites — have discovered the place in recent years, much of its quaint residential infrastructure has regained its polish, and city institutions have been reinvigorated.This is where people like Brienne Cliadakis have come in. She and her husband, Alex Gadea, an information technology consultant, moved here from the Upper West Side with their young son six years ago, “on the three-year plan,” and opened a coffee shop. Ms. Cliadakis is now, among other things, the board president of the Wee Play Community Project, which has helped rejuvenate parkland.Although the couple gave up on the coffee shop after three years, they were hooked on the city. Yet in recent months, after deciding to buy, they couldn’t find anything bigger than the rental they already occupied. “The houses we did like were snapped up from under us,” Ms. Cliadakis said, so they are looking to relocate across the river in Newburgh, “as close to the bridge as possible.” One likely candidate, a 1920s Tudor priced at under $200,000, would cost more than $300,000 in Beacon, if you could find it, she said.Mr. Dexter said 400 new residential units were “approved or close to approval,” some in reclaimed factory space like the brick hulk soon to be known as One East Main, a luxury condominium. A challenge is to find ways of strengthening the geographic bond between Main Street and the riverfront, which are separated by Route 9D. To that end, he added, zoning is being modified to allow for denser mixed-used development in what he called the “linkage zone” between the areas.None of which should alter the walkability that makes Beacon “sort of like being in Old Europe,” Ms. Cliadakis said.“You can have a house and a small garden,” she said, “and walk to everything within two miles.”What You’ll FindBeacon, a nearly five-square-mile area, according to United States census data, with a diverse population of around 15,500, has its core on Main Street, which is picturesque, eclectic and lengthy, with a somewhat surprising trajectory. From Route 9D it heads southeast until it gets almost to Fishkill Creek. Then it takes a left turn, becomes more industrial and dead-ends. After the left turn, East Main picks up, crosses the creek and unspools toward Mount Beacon, on the city’s southeastern side. One reason for this topographical oddity is historical, said Ms. Gould, the former mayor. Western Beacon used to be a town called Fishkill Landing; the eastern side was Matteawan. Last year marked the centennial of their incorporation under one name.The Main-to-East-Main transition is highlighted by the park-flanked creek, which just a little distance away fans out into Beacon Falls. The Roundhouse at Beacon Falls, a collection of 19th-century factory buildings perched alongside, is a recent reinvention, a hotel, restaurant and event space taking full advantage of the views.What You’ll PayA recent search of the website midhudsonmlshomes.com revealed 59 listings, only one exceeding $1 million, two in the $500,000 range, and almost all the rest at $350,000 and below. Donna M. Hardisty, a principal broker of Sam’s Realty, was one of several who described older properties near the heart of town as being harder to find and snapped up when available.In one such quick transaction, Jing Chang and her husband, David Caso, who live and work in Brooklyn, recently paid $225,000 for a two-bedroom two-bath weekend house about a block from Main Street. Attracted by Dia:Beacon, hiking and kayaking, the couple and their daughter, Keana, 10, had found themselves returning but growing tired of hotels. The house is close to the train station, which is ideal for Ms. Chang, who does not drive. “Ten minutes and we’re home,” she said.Brokers said the market was not strongly affected by the crash in 2008, and multiple listing service numbers bear them out. In 2009, 68 houses changed hands, at an average of $269,000, after an average 138 days. Last year 76 houses sold, at an average of $259,000, listing for an average 130 days.The most sought-after rentals are those above storefronts on Main Street; one-bedrooms there range from $900 to $1,400 a month, said Jonathan Miller, the principal broker of JonCar Realty.What to DoBeacon’s activities do not lend themselves to easy summary. The city website catalogs almost two dozen gallery spaces alone. The Beacon Theater — on Main Street like most everything else — is a 1930s-era bijou offering live theater. As for live music, the city scored a coup last year when the Towne Crier Cafe moved to Main Street from its longtime home in Pawling. Recent marquee names include Loudon Wainwright.The twin poles of activity are Mount Beacon to the east and the Hudson on the west. The mountain, immortalized on the New York State Seal, draws hikers. The stretch of river in the area, swimmable and fishable, owes its transformation in large part to Mr. Seeger, his sloop the Clearwater and organizations like Riverkeeper. Other Seeger legacies include the River Pool, a swimming hole (opening for the season on July 1), and the Great Newburgh to Beacon Swim, scheduled for its 11th year on Aug. 2. The Scenic Hudson River Center runs environmental education programs.The SchoolsPublic elementary schools include J. V. Forrestal, Sargent and South Avenue. A fourth school, Glenham, is also part of the Beacon district, although it is in Fishkill, which along with Wappinger sends some students to Beacon schools. Rombout Middle School teaches Grades 6 through 8. At Beacon High School, which has 1,035 students, SAT averages last year were 496 in reading, 485 in math and 475 in writing, versus 485, 501 and 477 statewide.The CommuteA hub on the Metro-North Hudson line, the riverfront station also has connecting service to the Beacon-Newburgh ferry and buses to Stewart International Airport. The express train to Grand Central Terminal takes about 75 minutes. For drivers, the city’s position at the nexus of Interstate 84 and the bridge to Newburgh eases commuting to New York City or points west and offers convenient access to amenities like shopping at the Walmart Supercenters in Fishkill and Newburgh.The HistoryMarking the intersection of Main and East Main Streets, the “dummy light,” a city landmark, is said to be one of a handful of 1920s-era mid-road traffic signals still functioning in the United States. The logic of the name, said former Mayor Gould, is self-evident: Like a dummy, the signal stands “in the middle of the street.”An earlier version of this article misstated the opening date of the River Pool. It is July 1, not in late July.Advertisement