https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/12/opinion/joe-biden-2020.html
Opinion | The Biden Paradox, and How to Solve It - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
273
AdvertisementSupported byHe’s the most popular Democrat, but right now he has almost no chance to win the nomination.By Michael TomaskyContributing Opinion WriterJoe Biden, apparently on the cusp of declaring his third run for the White House, is caught in a paradox that might be without precedent in modern American presidential politics. Nearly everyone thinks he can beat Donald Trump. At the same time, no one thinks he’ll get the chance to do it — that is, notwithstanding the latest polls, which are just measuring name recognition, nearly everyone thinks he can’t win the nomination.How can this be the case? How can the Democrats have a candidate they all agree would stand a very strong chance of recapturing the White House, gaining the power to appoint liberal Supreme Court justices and all the rest, and yet not be hankering to send that candidate into battle?Some of this no doubt reflects on the party. We’re just not at a point in history where Democratic activists are going to grant any sort of automatic advantage to a white male. If anything, the opposite will be the case (except with regard to Bernie Sanders partisans, but they’re not necessarily Democratic activists).This wariness toward white-maledom makes some people nervous because, well, let’s be blunt: With one exception in the form of a person who was an exceedingly rare political talent and who benefited from a world-historic economic meltdown seven weeks before the election, this country has elected only white males to the presidency. The white non-male who was supposed to be a shoo-in last time lost.This has left some people thinking — and not just men, but, in my experience, a number of feminist women — that the Democrats should just submit to this perceived reality and nominate someone who (ahem) “looks the part.”But the bulk of the energy among the party’s activist base is probably in the other direction. I would not say, and I don’t think any Democrat should say, that a woman or a person of color (or both) can’t win the presidency in 2020. An African-American woman almost became the governor of Georgia, and one can certainly argue that the American electorate is somewhat to the left of the Georgia electorate. Donald Trump is unpopular, and may well be more so after the Mueller report and a raft of congressional hearings. Many economists anticipate a recession. Given all these factors, and the likely makeup of the 2020 electorate (less than 70 percent white), it’s not so difficult to imagine a non-white male winning.And yet, over here sits Mr. Biden, still widely considered the Democrat most likely to beat the president, and possibly by a comfortable margin. But because his long record of public service includes some episodes that have worn quite poorly in our era, the nomination may be beyond his grasp. Is there any way for him to break out of this box?Mr. Biden has three problems, which I would rank in this order: first, his handling of the Anita Hill matter during the Clarence Thomas hearings, when he decided not to call other witnesses who could have corroborated Ms. Hill’s testimony; second, some of his positions on race, including opposition to busing and support for the 1994 crime bill, and some comments he made back then about “predators on our streets”; and third, his reputation as a Democrat too fully of his era, too centrist and corporate (not helped by his being from Delaware, the corporation state).Mr. Biden’s first instinct will most likely be to explain and justify. That used to work in politics, a lot of the time. It doesn’t anymore, in the age of social media. Today, self-justification is among the greatest offenses a public figure can commit.Twitter is toxic and awful, and it’s always useful to remember that Twitter is not America. That said, the medium does efficiently reduce matters to their essence. And if Mr. Biden tried to defend his actions around the Thomas hearings — or to use his vice presidency under Barack Obama as cover — he would be savaged on social media, and that would metastasize into the conventional wisdom on him.So regarding Anita Hill, he needs to say he was wrong. And, crucially, he has to make clear exactly what he has learned in the intervening 28 years. That’s the hard part, but it’s what may convince his skeptics that he is a different person now. The same is true of his past position on school desegregation.On crime, he’s probably free to do a bit more contextualizing, explaining how big a problem crime was then. But if that’s the main thing people hear, it will again sound too self-justifying. Far better to say, “That was then, this is now,” tick off a list of initiatives aimed at improving the prospects of young black men and point out all the things he has done over the years along those lines (in a 40-plus-year career, they must exist).Finally, with respect to his centrism, Mr. Biden needs to pull off the trick, which dexterous politicians can do, of showing that he has nudged himself a bit to the left without sounding inauthentic. He might nod here toward young people, acknowledging that if he’d grown up with the capitalism that they did, he’d be mad, too.If Mr. Biden can acknowledge this and convince the doubters that he’s learned from the past, the Biden Paradox could be overcome. But of course, he has to actually believe he was once wrong on these questions, and this we do not know.The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Michael Tomasky is a columnist for The Daily Beast, editor of Democracy: A Journal of Ideas and a contributing opinion writer.  @mtomasky Advertisement