http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/01/dining/nick-kokonas-tock-ticketing-system-adopted-by-per-se.html
Nick Kokonas’s Tock Ticketing System Adopted by Per Se - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
608
AdvertisementSupported byBy Julia MoskinWill New Yorkers pay up front for restaurant meals?That’s the question posed by the announcement that Per Se (and its sister restaurant the French Laundry, in Napa Valley) will switch from taking conventional reservations to an advance-ticketing system in 2015.The system, called Tock, has been used since 2012 at the Chicago destinations Alinea and Next, where the co-owner, Nick Kokonas, devised the proprietary software. Diners at those restaurants reserve tables and pay online, in full, weeks or months in advance for nonrefundable tickets. Service charges are included, leaving only liquor charges to be added at the end of the meal.For restaurants taking part in Tock, once the system is widely available (its announcement of Per Se’s participation is part of a cautious rollout) it will be flexible, allowing choices like selling only part of a dining room, charging only a nominal fee in advance, and deciding whether to include tips.Tock hopes to win over restaurateurs from OpenTable, the industry leader, by charging a flat $695 monthly fee for unlimited use of the software: OpenTable clients must buy its touchscreen system, pay a $199 monthly fee, and pay $1 to $1.25 to OpenTable for each diner booked through the system.Thomas Keller, the chef and owner of the French Laundry and Per Se, is an investor in Tock; so is Rich Melman, an owner of the restaurant conglomerate Lettuce Entertain You Enterprises. One of the restaurants in that group, which includes prestigious Chicago restaurants like Everest and Tru, will start using the software within the next 10 days, Mr. Kokonas said in a phone interview on Monday. (Over all, the group has more than 80 restaurants, and takes in about $400 million in annual revenue.)At the Lower East Side restaurant WD-50, the chef and owner, Wylie Dufresne, used Tock to manage reservations for its final months before it closed last week; the restaurant sold $250,000 in tickets in two hours after the system went live, Mr. Kokonas said.“Tock is perfect for that,” said Daniel Patterson, the Bay Area chef and owner of Coi. “When there is a limited supply, Tock works really well.” Next year, Mr. Patterson plans to convert Coi, the flagship of his restaurant group, to Tock. In his new restaurant, Aster, only four seats, dedicated to a tasting menu, will be fully ticketed. “For a menu like that, when we are investing in spiny lobster” and other expensive ingredients, ensuring that the seats will be filled actually keeps prices down, he said.According to data published by Mr. Kokonas, the system eliminates the expenses of maintaining a reservations staff and virtually eliminates no-shows, an endemic problem across the industry. On any given night, about 10 percent of restaurant reservations go unclaimed. Several new online services and apps like Resy and Reserve have begun charging for reservations (not meals), with similar goals.New Yorkers have long treasured their right to make multiple restaurant reservations and decide at the last minute which one to keep. The polite ones call to cancel; the careless ones don’t, which had no consequences in the days of the smudged-pencil reservation book.With OpenTable, no-shows get a slap on the wrist and can eventually be barred from using the system. With Tock, a no-show — even one who happens to be genuinely ill, or snarled in Lincoln Tunnel traffic — risks losing the entire cost of the meal, which can easily run into thousands of dollars.So, will New Yorkers accept that risk?“To go to Per Se or the French Laundry, of course I’ll pay” in advance, said Lauren Silverman, a publicist in the fashion industry who says she eats out five or six nights a week. “I know I’m going to spend that money anyway.”“But,” she added, “for some new restaurant in Williamsburg, or any place that isn’t definitely amazing, no way.”Advertisement