https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/22/dining/the-grill-review-midtown.html
The Grill Is Confident, Theatrical, Sharp and New Yorky - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2040
AdvertisementSupported byRestaurant Review9 PhotosView Slide Show ›When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.By Pete WellsNew York kept certain fantasies about the Four Seasons alive for a long time. We told ourselves that it was an elegant restaurant, that it was an important restaurant, that the roll call of designers, editors and so on who ate lunch there — a short list that grew shorter as publishers moved downtown, expense accounts were clipped and longtime patrons were called by the great reservationist in the sky — was proof of something other than the tendency of famous and busy people to act from habit and herd instinct.Long before the end, fantasy and reality had gone separate ways. The Four Seasons was a mess. The beaded curtain chains that rippled upward for 20 feet in endless waves like a waterfall running in reverse were coming apart, some of them missing or broken or lying on the floor like dead snakes. The bronze-rod Richard Lippold sculpture that hangs in midair over the towers of whiskey and gin bottles inside the square bar was furry with dust.A dinner I had in 2013 was a disaster, from the stale rolls to the zombified service to the dry and crumbly duck served with fruit compote that tasted like the filling in a grocery-store pie. It goes without saying that all this cost a pile of money.Because the restaurant’s lease was winding down, I never wrote up that meal. And when the landlord signed a new one with the Major Food Group instead of the old owners, New Yorkers might have mourned the end of our fantasy Four Seasons, but there weren’t a lot of reasons to be sad about losing the real one.Now, instead of one restaurant, we have two. Rich Torrisi and Mario Carbone, the two chefs who run the Major Food Group with their noncooking partner, Jeff Zalaznick, have taken a divide-and-conquer strategy. Mr. Torrisi is in charge of what was the Pool Room and is now just the Pool. The Grill, formerly the Grill Room, is in the hands of Mr. Carbone. It was the first to open, in May, and comes very close to being the kind of restaurant many of us imagined in this space all along.The Grill is confident, theatrical, retro, unsentimental, sharp and New Yorky. Like other projects from Major Food Group, it is packed with ideas and historical allusions. Unpacking it all is a lot of fun if you can afford it; preposterous expense is one reality of the old restaurant that the new tenants preserved.They also preserved the Philip Johnson interior, after the landlord proposed some changes that were swatted down by the Landmarks Preservation Commission. Rightly so: funded by the Seagram Company, Johnson did something astonishing in this room. It’s a vast space that offers privacy, a corporate monument that gives back to the public, an expression of International Style austerity that feels exuberant.All that is in sharp focus again now that it’s holding a restaurant with a full battery charge. The beads have been strung back together. Lippold’s bronze glints again. The book-matched French walnut paneling is glossier and more radiant, the patterns in the grain more evocative of monumental abstract paintings, than before.Mr. Carbone, Mr. Torrisi and Mr. Zalaznick prepare for their restaurants the way Matthew Weiner or David Simon get ready for a new show, with a mountain of research. Taking over a high point of midcentury modernism gave them license to study James Beard, rolling trolleys, Jacqueline Kennedy, the martini, John Cage, club sandwiches, Joe Baum, continental cuisine, Delmonico’s, green goddess dressing, Craig Claiborne and Catalina sauce.Some dish names are cryptic, as if written to invite a question the servers can answer with a story. The one about “Jack’s Pie” involves John F. Kennedy and comes in two parts. The second is a dubious dirty joke about Marilyn Monroe.This postmodern approach to modernism leads to some self-conscious nonsense. Next to the staircase is a buffet table set with a surreal cornucopia of vegetables, fruits and layer cakes. It’s stunning to look at but it’s purely decorative — “a buffet in name only,” the servers have to explain.Dinner sees a traffic jam of rolling carts parked tableside for various bits of stage business, some of which are pointless. Peach Melba doesn’t get better when you set it on fire, and when a server painstakingly removes a pastry seal on a cocotte to reveal two pieces of endive, you have to wonder if Mr. Carbone hasn’t lost his mind.But any doubts about his sanity vanish when you taste the spectacularly good guinea hen that the endive accompanies. Roasted and sauced with jus, Madeira and black truffles, it is among the most delicious things I’ve eaten this year.So is the Seagram crab cake, very sweet and pure under a golden lid of potato coins.So is the prime rib, carved thick or thin at your elbow — this time, the ritual makes sense — and set in front of you along with a meaty barbecued bone in a dark mustard and spice crust.So are the lamb chops, brushed with curry oil and grilled, with yogurt sauce and a fantastic molded cone of apple-mint jelly.So is the honey-mustard duck breast, dry aged for a month until it is supernaturally tender.So is the larded squab in bittersweet orange sauce with a grilled candied orange; the lard is provided by a cloak of whipped fat that bathes the squab breast as it cooks.So is the slice of lemon chiffon cake confected by Jennifer Yee, who is serving as pastry chef until the restaurant is on solid footing. Perfectly tender and fluffy and just sweet enough, it is the kind of dessert that has almost disappeared from New York restaurants, and deserves to come back.I’ll be thinking about those dishes for the rest of the year, and probably beyond. At least half a dozen others are merely very, very good: the gently spicy salad called avocado crab Louis; the anchovy-laced steak tartare that finishes with a surprising riptide of chile heat; the broodingly dark crab gumbo; the “Neptune’s crown” Dover sole under a Creole shellfish sauce; the hot pretzel twists and the griddled anadama bread and the nearly weightless dinner rolls brushed with butter that come around at the start of the meal.For all of this you pay prices that range from “Wow” to “Are you guys serious?” The reassembled lobster Newburg (or Newberg, as the menu has it), in a reduced-fat sauce outfitted with dried cherry tomatoes and basil leaves, is marked “MP” on the menu; it’s $98, about five times what you’d pay for a live lobster of the same size.At least it’s memorable, which is more than can be said for the $25 jumble of smoked wild mushrooms held together by a wafer-thin one-egg “omelet,” or the $38 chicken “à la Queen,” which is like chicken cacciatore that’s been fancied up.Balanced against a few lapses of taste and judgment, though, is the real achievement of Mr. Carbone and his partners in breathing new life into the formal, French-derived style of dining. This used to be the only style chefs thought was suitable for expensive restaurants. But then tasting counters came along; suddenly the rituals of captains standing at attention above white tablecloths seemed antiquated.Taking off from the model the Major Food Group polished at Carbone, the Grill turns that old and increasingly empty formality into theater, or a game that everybody can get in on. The captains are allowed to have personalities, which means the rest of us can, too. It would work even better if Major Food Group hired more women for the dining room; it’s hard to imagine many female captains who would be O.K. with calling Marilyn Monroe “Jack’s pie.”As a strict constructionist about the architecture of this space, I can’t write about it without registering the loss of the lovely, understated modernist stemware, bowls and other pieces designed specifically for these rooms by Garth and Ada Louise Huxtable. Eating here without them is like visiting a Frank Lloyd Wright house furnished by Ikea.Some of the things they’ve been replaced by are very good. Others are reasonably apt. A few are painful. The chunky brass bar coasters marked with a big capital G are a Trumpian touch. So are the napkins with “THE GRILL” embroidered in gold thread.But coasters and napkins can’t cause lasting damage to an interior this extraordinary. It was always one of the most beautiful dining rooms in New York. Now it’s also one of its most exciting restaurants.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.When you make a reservation at an independently reviewed restaurant through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.This information was last updated on Nov. 17, 2018Reservations powered by OpenTableEMAIL petewells@nytimes.com. And follow Pete Wells on Twitter: @pete_wells.Advertisement