https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/07/opinion/the-argument-catholic-church-gay.html
Opinion | How Does the Catholic Church Redeem Itself? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
246
AdvertisementtranscriptWith Ross Douthat, Michelle Goldberg and David LeonhardtAnd is universal pre-K universally good?Thursday, March 7th, 2019michelle goldbergI’m Michelle Goldberg.david leonhardtI’m David Leonhardt.ross douthatI’m Ross Douthat and this is “The Argument.” This week, is universal pre-K just a liberal pipe dream?michelle goldbergIt’s been transformative for a lot of families.ross douthatAnd then what is the place of gay priests in the Catholic Church?andrew sullivanI think we need to have a healthier gay priesthood, put it that way.ross douthatAnd finally a recommendation.david leonhardtBut the ones that I have come to like I really do read. I actually look forward to getting them.ross douthatUniversal pre-K always tends to show up on progressive policy wish lists.senator elizabeth warrenThe challenge of finding reliable, affordable child care is a huge boulder wedged firmly between women and a million opportunities out there. [APPLAUSE]ross douthatAdvocates promise that it will help level the playing field for kids by making early education more accessible, which they say would lead to a range of other related effects that would be really good for society. But not everyone, including me, is convinced that universal pre-K is universally good. This week we have our colleague Mara Gay here to join us. Mara writes about New York politics for The Times. Hey Mara, welcome back.mara gayThank you so much for having me. I feel honored.ross douthatSo Mara, can you talk a little about what universal pre-K looks like in places in America that have it, like now, New York City?mara gaySure. So this is considered to be Mayor Bill de Blasio’s greatest achievement in office. And essentially in 2013, before he was elected, we had 19,000 kids enrolled in pre-K and today we have 70,000 children enrolled in pre-k. And it’s a program that has a lot of problems. It’s very difficult to implement. But it’s also a program that’s been heralded as giving thousands of children a better start in life. The Head Start program, going decades back, the federal program, to help low income children access preschool and early learning programs was, in many studies, seen as very successful depending on how and where it was implemented. And so this is really a continuation of that at the city level.david leonhardtMichelle, you’re actually in the New York City program, right? Your kids are in it?michelle goldbergRight, well yeah. I mean my son went to universal pre-K and my daughter’s in it now. And you know it’s probably the reason why I will always be a de Blasio was the border. I mean because he created what is basically a whole new school system in a very short period of time. And it’s been transformative for a lot of families, you know? And my family’s super privileged but it has really removed a huge burden for us and I can only imagine what a help it is for people without our resources. And to be honest I feel like pre-K is often — universal pre-K is often justified in terms of its impact on school readiness. For us, the most important thing about pre-K is just that it’s a form of subsidized child care. You know, so when my daughter was in preschool for 3-year-olds which is not subsidized, we were paying more than $20,000 a year. And all of the sudden we’re not paying that anymore.david leonhardtRoss, there are conservatives who think pre-K is one of the best things that government can do, but my sense is you’re not among those conservatives. Is that right?ross douthatWell I mean, first some sort of personal disclosures, right? We used to live in Washington D.C. which has universal pre-K. We availed ourselves of universal pre-K for a year when we were living there. So I have no sort of deep-seeded ideological aversion to putting kids in daycare. I put my own kids in daycare. That being said I think the case for skepticism here is sort of twofold. First, and here I think Michelle and I probably somewhat agree, I think there’s sort of an overselling of the extent to which pre-K prepares kids for school, levels the playing field, leads to increased economic opportunity down the road. A lot of the evidence we have from Head Start programs in the past is that these programs can work really well when they’re small scale and to have a dedicated group of people running them. But they scale very badly and the effects diminish the bigger they get. If you look at one of the biggest experiments with universal pre-K which is something that Quebec — you know, our great socialist neighbor to the north — did starting in 1997, a big, province-wide universal pre-K program. There was a big study on this by a group of economists a couple of years ago which showed that a lot of measures of not just child preparedness but child well-being actually declined for kids who were in the program. Which doesn’t tell us anything about New York but at least it tells us how difficult it can be to build a sort of educationally and, for that matter, emotionally effective program. So I think there’s a lot of reason for skepticism that universal pre-K has these big effects on how kids perform in school down the road and economic opportunity and so on. And so the case for it really boils down to, you know, people need child care. And I agree that people need child care but I think it’s much more reasonable to build programs that don’t basically discriminate against families that have a parent staying home with the kids. So to the extent that I could be talked into a universal pre-K program I would want it to look like something like what Nat Bruenig, who runs this small outfit called the People’s Policy Project, just put out where you have a universal pre-K program that also provides a subsidy for mothers or fathers who are providing care in the home. That basically tries to maintain a level playing field between stay-at-home parents, part-time parents and parents who work full time.michelle goldbergBut you could you could just as easily say that public school discriminates against homeschooling parents. I mean it’s the nature of public goods that not everybody avails themselves of them. I mean that’s just sort of fundamentally how redistribution works.david leonhardtYes, but I think there’s a way to do redistribution that doesn’t have an inherent bias against stay-at-home parents. And so to me a program where the country said we have universal pre-K, but we are also going to give a tax credit to stay-at-home parents below a certain income, is better than one where we say, hey you know what? If you want to stay home and take care of your kid and you’re working class we don’t help you, but if you want to put your kid in daycare or pre-K we do help you.mara gayI mean in New York City the experience is that there’s vast disparity in income and benefits for teachers in some of these pre-K programs. So in one neighborhood you may have a pre-K program where the teachers are making $60,000 a year, $50,000 a year or more. And then in another neighborhood you have a community-based program where teachers are making $20,000 to $35,000 or $40,000 a year. So not every pre-K is the same. But at the same time I think that’s infrastructure that can certainly be improved upon. And I also would say to Michelle’s point that that is a huge benefit for many working parents especially those who couldn’t afford to pay for child care on their own. So it’s hard to, I think from a practical perspective from my end, see a downside. Seems to be a good use of money. I mean there’s certainly room for room for improvement.michelle goldbergRight. I mean it’s hugely popular and sort of one of those public goods that’s taken advantage of by all social classes. Right? Like one of the things that I really like about my daughter’s UPK is it really looks like New York City. I also don’t really understand this idea that it discriminates against stay-at-home parents, I mean in part because stay-at-home parents also use universal pre-K, right? I mean you can be a stay-at-home parent and still not mind getting six hours off a day. You know it’s the stay at home parents that end up becoming class parents and playing this really influential role, a lot of times, in how the schools run. I don’t know that they sort of resent the fact that there is this free public good that gives them a few hours off every day.ross douthatWell those, I mean those stay-at-home parents don’t obviously and if you’re a stay-at-home parent who wants to avail yourself of universal pre-K it’s obviously a good that you’re using. But there are a lot of stay-at-home parents who are stay-at-home parents precisely because they don’t want daycare providers taking care of their kids for six to eight hours a day. And those parents are performing large amounts, I mean very large amounts, of unpaid labor that effectively remains unpaid even as their tax dollars go to pay for somebody else taking care of other people’s kids. So it’s it — it does — I mean I don’t think you can escape from the fact that it discriminates. I just think the best way to do that pro-parent redistribution is to say, we’re going to have universal daycare but we’re also going to provide a subsidy for people who have three kids, two of whom are under five and they’re taking care of all of them in the home. I’m curious how much hostility there would be among liberals, feminists, other groups with a lot of voice in these kind of universal pre-K arguments to that kind of program, right? To someone saying we’re going to do universal pre-K —michelle goldbergI think it depends on whether you make it zero sum, right? Like I would be hostile to that kind of program if it meant doing away with universal pre-K. You know I wouldn’t be hostile to that sort of program on top of universal pre-K, for all the reasons I just pointed out. I think that what it ends up doing is becoming an incentive for one parent to stay home or even just like a bonus for families where one parent is privileged enough to stay home and would likely be not enough to let most parents avail themselves of private options for pre-K.mara gayRight. I mean I think I agree with Michelle on that but I have to say that it reminds me a little bit of this argument, and we have it all over society but, is it “Black Lives Matter” or is it “All Lives Matter?” And it’s like, where is the greatest need? And the greatest need is absolutely with low-income and working-income families. One of the cool things about universal pre-K and the way that de Blasio has rolled out in New York is that they’re not just trying to address the needs of the neediest families but of everyone. And so I think that’s a great idea for a lot of reasons and one of them is what you described Michelle, which is that we’re helping integrate, at least the pre-K, racially earlier. I think that’s really important. And I think that’s a public good. But I have to say that I would have a problem with taxpayer dollars going to incentivize or reward folks who have every right to stay home. But I think the way that would work in New York is most likely — you know I live in Brooklyn Heights and the stay-at-home moms in my neighborhood can afford to stay home. Very few people can anymore. And so I don’t love the idea, frankly, of taxpayer dollars going to families who don’t need them where we have massive needs.david leonhardtSo I’m in favor of universal pre-K. Mara, I understand that idea, that you don’t want to have money basically go into the upper-middle class, but I still think it’s a real concern that universal pre-K discriminates against people who want to be stay-at-home parents including working-class people.ross douthatWe also have just established early in this conversation that universal pre-K itself provides a kind of subsidy to those well-off moms in Brooklyn because they get to be stay-at-home moms and put their kids in pre-K for four or five hours a day and sort of ease their stay-at-home lifestyles.mara gayYou’re getting a public good out of out of having wealthier kids in a public school that you’re not getting when they’re at home. So I would make that argument any day.david leonhardtYeah I guess I would argue that it’s also a public good to give working-class families more choice about how they want to raise their kids, whether they want to do it his stay-at-home parents or in daycare because that’s the same choice that upper-middle class families have.ross douthatThere’s also a sense in which we have for better or worse a public consensus in this country that K-through-12 education is sort of a necessary part of preparing people for adulthood. We don’t have that kind of consensus — I think for somewhat good reasons, as even that Quebec study suggests — about what 3-year-olds need in order to be prepared for society. Right? Which is, if you say we should put all 12-year-olds in public school I think a lot more people would endorse that than if we said we should put all 2-year-olds in daycare. We require people to put kids in school with obvious homeschooling exceptions. We don’t require that for under 5-year-olds, I think for some obvious reasons.mara gayOne of the interesting things in New York is that there’s this debate about whether the program should have been rolled out in low-income neighborhoods first. And I’m not sure how I feel about that but I do think that it goes to the heart of what we we’re what we’re discussing here which is, is that discriminatory against other kinds of families? Should we care? I don’t know.michelle goldbergI don’t think it’s discriminatory but I just think it was smart to roll it out the way they did because it created, frankly, a kind of politically powerful base of support for these programs. That’s just the kind of general issue about universal benefits versus means-tested benefits is that, you know, by doing it the way they did they got families like mine heavily invested in the success of this program.mara gayThat’s right. I agree. I mean, I tend to agree. I think that it’s important to have middle class and upper-middle class and wealthy families invested in the public school system in New York City. And you know unfortunately that has often been done at the cost of other families. And so it doesn’t have to be a zero-sum game. And this is a great example of something that actually largely I think is working.ross douthatOne other dynamic here is that I think that upper-middle class parents are more comfortable having their kids integrate with poorer kids in younger grades than in older grades.mara gayYeah.ross douthatSo I think you see a lot more sort of acceptance of the idea of racial and socioeconomic integration among 6-year-olds than you do once middle school rolls around.mara gayWell, look, in a segregated city I think having integrated preschool is a darn good start.david leonhardtLook I have little concerns about it. We’ve talked about the stay-at-home parent issue. I also think progressives often don’t pay enough attention to the quality and aren’t willing to be tough enough about shutting down or sanctioning programs that are not good. But to me, overall, pre-K is doing a ton of good. And I think it’s an important thing to keep in mind in this moment when it’s easy to feel like everything is moving in the wrong direction in our country. There are actually some things in this country that are getting better.ross douthatWe’re going to take a quick break and then I’ll be back with a conversation about Catholicism with Andrew Sullivan. It’s been another hard winter of scandal for my church, the Roman Catholic Church. Pope Francis recently convened the church’s first global summit on sex abuse, promising accountability for bishops as well as priests, even as he was taking the dramatic step of defrocking Cardinal Theodore McCarrick of Washington D.C. for abuse.news clipTheodore McCarrick lost the title of cardinal back in July. Now he’s become the highest ranking figure to be defrocked in recent memory.ross douthatMeanwhile a new book on homosexuality in the Vatican stirred the debate over the church’s rules on celibacy and the prevalence of closeted gay men in the priesthood. Andrew Sullivan and I have been arguing about our shared church really ever since he allowed me to guest blog for him many, many years ago. And he’s been writing about all of this for New York Magazine lately. So I’ve invited him to join me for a intra-Catholic conversation. Andrew, welcome to “The Argument.”andrew sullivanThank you Ross. It’s lovely to be here and lovely to talk to you again. It’s been too long.ross douthatIt has indeed. So let’s start with I guess a sort of big-picture, practical question. What do you think caused the church’s sex abuse scandal? And more importantly, why is it still this ongoing scandal after so many years of revelations, attempted solutions, attempted summits and so on?andrew sullivanWell, that’s a big question and I think the answer is quite complicated. Many institutions have child abuse problems. I mean it’s obviously not just the Roman Catholic Church. I mean we’ve been seeing other denominations find this too. So you start with a baseline depressing fact that this goes on and we’re becoming more aware of it. But then I also think that the way the church closets its gay priests, and the way in which it has an extremely high resistance to giving scandal — as the formal word would be about the church — that it has a culture of secrecy and hierarchy which is almost designed to prevent these things being exposed quickly and swiftly and properly. And then I think we do have a problem with the fact that the priesthood is overwhelming — well not overwhelmingly but disproportionately gay. Let’s put it that way. And that has led to so many priests being in the closet. And celibacy being what it is, it’s a process. It isn’t a sudden reinvention of the human being. It’s a difficult task for most priests and many of them occasionally will fail. Most priests have something in their background that could be used against them. And especially in the case of gay priests, who would be targeted both for violating celibacy in the instances that they might have, and also for just being gay itself. And therefore what emerged over the years was really a culture of secrecy in which everyone had something on everybody else. It was a sort of omertà — a mutually assured destruction of the closet. And that itself, I think, helped cover up the sex abuse and compound it. In this way, if someone were to notice something untoward happening with another priest and wanted to expose it, the person he was trying to expose would easily be able to come back, in most cases, and find something against that person to get him outed or to exact revenge. And this kind of allowed a culture of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” and not just about sex abuse with children or adolescents but also about sex in general with adults. And I think that contributed to this being compounded over the years in ways that are really too horrifying to even contemplate.ross douthatI think you can’t understand this without sort of getting into complexity, right? And you know I think for a long time, I mean one of the things about the church especially since the 1960s is that it has this kind of theological polarization between would-be liberalizers and would-be conservatives who disagree about how the church can change, how much it could change. Who tend to disagree specifically on issues like celibacy and how the church approaches homosexuality. And so both sides have had narratives where, you know, the liberals say, well obviously it’s hierarchy and celibacy and authority. And the conservatives tend to say, you know well no, there was this sort of breakdown in the church in the ‘60s and ‘70s when things went haywire and lots of men left the priesthood and there was sort of this sense that all the rules were being relaxed. And the people who remained included a lot of people who were sort of using the priesthood, you could almost say, to sort of hide from society, in certain ways. Sort of hide from adult responsibility and so on and those were, some of them were the kind of people who became predators and some of them were the kind of people who were likely to be compromised in various ways. And that’s when you got the real spike in sex abuse.andrew sullivanWe just don’t know, do we, how far back this goes? I mean when one looks at religious institutions, those have severe hierarchies in which there isn’t really any mechanism for whistleblowing that isn’t easily punished, I don’t think we should go overboard and say, we never had this problem in the past before we discovered it in the ‘60s and ‘70s. Now clearly that was a big spike and it does seem I think to have declined dramatically in the last decade or so. Although I agree with you it’s a complicated thing and I think all those the liberals and the conservatives all have something to contribute to this understanding of what has gone wrong. And it would be better if we were able to respect and understand each other’s concerns a little better. And as a homosexual person myself I really have no interest whatsoever in defending sexual abuse of any kind, gay or straight. The question becomes though, why is the priesthood so gay? And what does that do in the context of a church which in the last 20 to 30 years has doubled down on the impermissibility of homosexual relationships and indeed has described the very being of being homosexual in terms that I don’t think would be used to describe any other group of people. And my sense going around and talking to as many as I could is that they are really at the end of their rope. That the ability to keep lying all the time, which they have to do, is just morally and psychologically destructive to them and they may leave.ross douthatWell let’s talk about that question of why is the priesthood, as you say, so gay, right? And I think there are — I think there are a couple things going on. I think again it’s sort of a combination of deeply-rooted realities about Catholicism with a particular shift that happened 40 or so years ago. Right? Like you know if you have a church that teaches that gay sex is sinful and has a celibate male priesthood, there are obvious reasons why large numbers of same-sex attracted Catholic men would be drawn to the priesthood. And that seems like —.andrew sullivanFor centuries. For centuries.ross douthatRight. That seems like a sort of unvarying fact of Catholic life.andrew sullivanBut that’s a bad reason though. To cover up your own identity is a terrible reason to become a priest. What we talked about there is sort of the negative reason. There are very positive reasons why gay men seek the priesthood too, and that is why — and I think it’s important to say this explicitly at some point in any discussion — the vast majority of gay priests are wonderful people who give their lives and do amazing jobs day after day. I was blown away and still am blown away by the good work that they do. My solution is honesty. They don’t have to wear this on their sleeve every day and they shouldn’t talk about it very much at all. But it should be okay for their parishioners to understand that this is their journey and this is their person and this is who they are.ross douthatThere’s the sex abuse crisis that relates to pedophilia. And homosexuality and pedophilia are different and gay men are not any more likely to be pedophiles than straight men. And therefore we don’t want to say anything that collapses the two categories. But then the problem is you have this zone of abuse, which the former Cardinal McCarrick who abused his seminarians falls into, that is in effect, you know you could call it a sort of same-sex gay version of MeToo, right? Where it’s not priests abusing children, it’s closeted gay men in the hierarchy abusing their position to abuse seminarians, young men and teenagers, right?andrew sullivanWell, because I think that there’s been a confusion — because there’s a third category, right? Which is completely consensual adult relationships that are not sexually abusive, by which I mean the abuse of power within the church. And there are plenty of very adjusted gay priests who have found some balance in that. So there’s sexual abuse which is a totally different thing. There’s sexual failure, let’s say, to live up to celibacy and then there’s pedophilia. So there are three very different things. And I think they’re different also in their moral nature. So the child abuse is obviously absolutely despicable. The abuse is also despicable. But I don’t think it’s quite as bad as raping children, but the problem is the church cannot even sanction healthy sexuality for gay people. So from the Church’s point of view it all gets blurred together.ross douthatBut the church’s view is that priests are not supposed to have a healthy sexuality that embodies itself in sexual relationships. My question for you then is, do you think that there is a kind of theological move that the Catholic Church can make where you say, look we’re just going to accept the sexual revolution and we’re going to justify it through some mix of scriptural reinterpretation and references to Darwinian biology and historical revisionism. And in the end, I guess that’s the question: in the end where do you end up? What does the church teaching on sexuality at the end of this story?andrew sullivanWe have healthy, honest gay priests and healthy, honest straight priests all committed, so far as they can do as human beings, to celibacy. We have a different understanding of homosexuality within the church in which we are not just regarded as a problem to be solved but as a gift to be cherished and in which the next generation does not see the Roman Catholic Church as a bastion of irrational bigotry, which is what they now believe. The end if we do not change is going to be the disintegration of the church.ross douthatO.K. Well, we have to leave it there. Andrew, we’ll have to do it again sometime. Thank you so much for doing this small part of a larger argument.andrew sullivanThank you Ross. It’s always lovely to talk you. God bless.ross douthatYou too. Now it’s time once again for our weekly recommendation and this week it’s David’s turn. David, what do you have for us?david leonhardtSo my recommendation is e-mail newsletters. I realize that e-mail is not the sexiest form of technology and if anything it feels kind of old-fashioned and early 21st century. But a couple of years ago I started writing a daily e-mail newsletter and to prepare for it I started subscribing to more and I came to realize that it’s a really wonderful way to receive information. And so I basically now start my day reading three or four different email newsletters. I read Vox Sentences, which actually comes out at night by Nicole Fallert and others. There’s a great newsletter for people involved in politics written by Jonathan Bernstein of Bloomberg. It’s almost baseball season, my single favorite form of baseball content is a newsletter by a guy named Joe Sheehan. Sometimes you have to pay for these but that doesn’t tend to be a lot of money. And even with all these other forms of technology I’ve decided that just opening my inbox in the morning or in the evening and reading a bunch of these e-mail newsletters is really a nice way to keep up on the world. So I wonder, do either of you subscribe to e-mail newsletters?michelle goldbergYou know, I actually don’t know if I do. I might but it doesn’t become — I’m surprised that it doesn’t just become one more looming thing in your inbox that you’re kind of supposed to look at but can’t quite face, which is how I feel about you know 90 percent of the e-mails that I get.david leonhardtI will confess that I subscribe to many more e-mail newsletters than I read but the ones that I have come to like, I really do read. I actually look forward to getting them because maybe it’s the fact that they’re written in a nice, casual voice but they’ve become really a central part of my media diet and I don’t think about them as some miserable form of e-mail that I have to respond to. Maybe it’s because you don’t have to respond to them. You could just read them and then not worry about it.michelle goldbergAnd what do you get out of them that you don’t get just through social media or listservs or other kinds of, you know, information delivery systems?david leonhardtSo there are a few people out there who have decided that this is the right business model for them. So Judd Legum who’s a progressive writer for many years has decided that what he’s going to do is launch a newsletter, charge some amount of money for it, but this will free him up to just focus on the really important stuff he wants to focus on. Joe Sheehan, the baseball writer, has basically done the same thing. And so in some cases it’s that people who I think are really smart have decided this is a good model for journalism, and I just want to read them. In other cases I think it’s sort of a form of summary. This guy Jonathan Bernstein from Bloomberg opinion basically helps summarize the political news of the day in just a couple hundred words. And I think email forces a form of both conversationalism and also brevity that I find useful.ross douthatSadly I’ve been with Michelle on this, at least until now, in that I subscribe to a number of e-mail newsletters and they tend to pile up like the proverbial unread New Yorkers in my inbox. But David, I’m going to make a change. I’m going to be a different man. I’m going to go all in and actually read them. That’s our show for the week. Thanks so much for listening. As always we’d love to hear your feedback. Leave us a voicemail at 347-915-4324, and we might play you on the show. You can also e-mail us at argument@nytimes.com. And if you’d like what you hear we’d love if you’d leave us a rating or review an Apple Podcasts. This week’s show was produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media and edited by Lacy Roberts. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn. We had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett, Ian Prasad Philbrick and Frances Ying. And our theme was composed by Allison Leyton-Brown. Thanks again.michelle goldbergO.K. You’ve convinced me. [LAUGHTER]david leonhardtI do not subscribe to astrology.Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Apple Podcasts | RadioPublic | Stitcher | Spotify | Google PlayThis week on “The Argument,” Mara Gay of the Times editorial board joins the columnists to discuss the merits and potential pitfalls of universal prekindergarten initiatives. Michelle Goldberg argues that universal pre-K can be transformative, both educationally and as subsidized child care. Ross Douthat thinks such programs effectively discriminate against stay-at-home parents. And Mara sees the racially integrated nature of New York City’s pre-K program as a kind of public service.Then, New York magazine’s Andrew Sullivan sits down with Ross to debate the roots of the Roman Catholic Church’s dual crises around sexuality and sexual abuse — and what should be done about them.Finally, David Leonhardt recommends an epistolary fix to your sprawling media diet: email newsletters.Background Reading:Ross on Pope Francis, the Catholic Church’s sex abuse scandal and celibacy in the churchDavid on the growth of pre-KThe Times’s editorial board on New York City’s pre-K programAndrew Sullivan’s “The Corruption of the Vatican’s Gay Elite Has Been Exposed” and “The Gay Church,” in New York magazineI’ve been an Op-Ed columnist since 2009, and I write about politics, religion, pop culture, sociology and the places where they all intersect. I’m a Catholic and a conservative, in that order, which means that I’m against abortion and critical of the sexual revolution, but I tend to agree with liberals that the Republican Party is too friendly to the rich. I was against Donald Trump in 2016 for reasons specific to Donald Trump, but in general I think the populist movements in Europe and America have legitimate grievances and I often prefer the populists to the “reasonable” elites. I’ve written books about Harvard, the G.O.P., American Christianity and Pope Francis; I’m working on one about decadence. Benedict XVI was my favorite pope. I review movies for National Review and have strong opinions about many prestige television shows. I have three small children, two girls and a boy, and I live in New Haven with my wife.I’ve been an Op-Ed columnist at The New York Times since 2017, writing mainly about politics, ideology and gender. These days people on the right and the left both use “liberal” as an epithet, but that’s basically what I am, though the nightmare of Donald Trump’s presidency has radicalized me and pushed me leftward. I’ve written three books, including one, in 2006, about the danger of right-wing populism in its religious fundamentalist guise. (My other two were about the global battle over reproductive rights and, in a brief detour from politics, about an adventurous Russian émigré who helped bring yoga to the West.) I love to travel; a long time ago, after my husband and I eloped, we spent a year backpacking through Asia. Now we live in Brooklyn with our son and daughter.I’ve worked at The Times since 1999 and have been an Op-Ed columnist since 2016. I caught the journalism bug a very long time ago — first as a little kid in the late 1970s who loved reading the Boston Globe sports section and later as a teenager working on my high school and college newspapers. I discovered that when my classmates and I put a complaint in print, for everyone to see, school administrators actually paid attention. I’ve since worked as a metro reporter at The Washington Post and a writer at BusinessWeek magazine. At The Times, I started as a reporter in the business section and have also been a Times Magazine staff writer, the Washington bureau chief and the founding editor of The Upshot.My politics are left of center. But I’m also to the right of many Times readers. I think education reform has accomplished a lot. I think two-parent families are good for society. I think progressives should be realistic about the cultural conservatism that dominates much of this country. Most of all, however, I worry deeply about today’s Republican Party, which has become dangerously extreme. This country faces some huge challenges — inequality, climate change, the rise of China — and they’ll be very hard to solve without having both parties committed to the basic functioning of American democracy.Tune in on iTunes, Google Play, Spotify, Stitcher or wherever you listen to podcasts. Tell us what you think at argument@nytimes.com. Follow Michelle Goldberg (@michelleinbklyn), Ross Douthat (@DouthatNYT) and David Leonhardt (@DLeonhardt) on Twitter. This week’s show is produced by Alex Laughlin for Transmitter Media and edited by Lacy Roberts. Our executive producer is Gretta Cohn. We had help from Tyson Evans, Phoebe Lett and Ian Prasad Philbrick. Our theme is composed by Allison Leyton-Brown.Advertisement