https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/arts/whats-playing-at-cannes.html
What’s Playing at Cannes - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2346
AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicolas RapoldHere are a few of the films, in various categories, expected to attract attention at the Cannes Film Festival this week.“THE BEGUILED” In Sofia Coppola’s Civil War drama, a wounded Yankee soldier (Colin Farrell) settles in at a Southern girls’ boarding school to recover. The hothouse atmosphere gives rise to simmering tensions between the handsome visitor and the cooped-up residents. Nicole Kidman, Kirsten Dunst and Elle Fanning co-star in this fresh look at a story filmed by Don Siegel in 1971.“CARNE Y ARENA” It’s advertised as the first virtual-reality piece to be presented in the festival, and who better than the director of “The Revenant,” Alejandro G. Iñárritu, to create an immersive work of art? He and the cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki convey the peril immigrants face in crossing the United States-Mexico border.“THE KILLING OF A SACRED DEER” Yorgos Lanthimos is a reliable wellspring of dark absurdism at Cannes, having unnerved audiences in the past with “Dogtooth” and “The Lobster.” His latest film promises to continue his study of familial perversity with the story of a doctor who takes a fatherless teenager under his wing and unwittingly introduces upheaval to his family. Colin Farrell and Nicole Kidman again co-star.“LET THE SUNSHINE IN” In the opening-night film of Directors’ Fortnight, Juliette Binoche and the director Claire Denis team up to tell the story of a divorced woman in search of true love. But bare-bones plot summaries fall short when it comes to Ms. Denis’s customary impressionistic style. The filmmaker here works again with the atmospheric cinematographer Agnès Godard, and Gérard Depardieu and Alex Descas round out the cast.“OKJA” In Bong Joon-ho’s latest, a young woman and a giant beast that has become her friend are separated when a multinational conglomerate gets involved. Mr. Bong has already demonstrated his ability to create an absorbing creature feature in “The Host,” and his new movie has the potential for additional layers of emotional depth and skilled genre-splicing. Tilda Swinton co-stars as the company’s chief executive.“REDOUBTABLE” That title expresses the common perception of Jean-Luc Godard as an intimidating god of art cinema, but Michel Hazanavicius, whose film “The Artist” won five Oscars, tries to crack the enigma. The brooding French star Louis Garrel plays Mr. Godard as the headstrong director struggles to reconcile art, politics and romance during the crucial, tipping-point year of 1967.“24 FRAMES” When Abbas Kiarostami died last July, cinema lost one of its contemporary masters and true originals. His final work, reportedly completed before his death, began with some photographs he took over the years. Mr. Kiarostami once gave the following description of the film: “Each of these frames is in essence four minutes and 30 seconds of what I imagine to have transpired before and after a single image.”“VISAGES, VILLAGES” Alongside Mr. Godard, Agnès Varda is the other surviving legend of the French New Wave era, and she continues to blaze her own path. Her latest movie arises out of a photographic collaboration with the artist JR, which entailed crisscrossing and chronicling rural France. Besides illustrating Ms. Varda’s knack for spinning philosophical wisdom out of life, it’s also a document of a burgeoning artistic friendship.“WONDERSTRUCK” Coming off the 2015 Cannes triumph of “Carol,” Todd Haynes veers into a fascinating new direction with an adaptation of Brian Selznick’s illustrated children’s novel. The split story toggles between two deaf children (one in 1927, one in 1977) using black-and-white photography and a creative sound design. The director’s frequent muse, Julianne Moore, co-stars.“YOU WERE NEVER REALLY HERE” In Lynne Ramsay’s first new feature in six years, a war veteran (Joaquin Phoenix) tries to rescue a young girl from a life of sex trafficking. Ms. Ramsay adapts the acclaimed novella by Jonathan Ames, which was noted for its taut account of vengeance and blowback. The film has been the subject of much anticipation, not to mention a reported bidding war that ended with its acquisition by Amazon Studios.Advertisement